source: Books - all\DistributedSystems_Concepts&Design_Kindberg.pdf
method: pdf
sha256: 344831445ddb68b16909969a4597cb8100bea220a303757c5ef77e4173545585
pages:  1067
ocr:    1 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    300
----------------------------------------------------------------------
===== page 601 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 583
BIND allows for three categories of name server: primary servers, secondary
servers and caching-only servers. The named program implements just one of these
types, according to the contents of a configuration file. The first two categories are as
described above. Caching-only servers read in from a configuration file sufficient names
and addresses of authoritative servers to resolve any name. Thereafter, they only store
this data and data that they learn by resolving names for clients.
A typical organization has one primary server, with one or more secondary servers
that provide name serving on different local area networks at the site. Additionally,
individual computers often run their own caching-only server, to reduce network traffic
and speed up response times still further.
DiscussionoftheDNS • The DNS Internet implementation achieves relatively short
average response times for lookups, considering the amount of naming data and the
scale of the networks involved. We have seen that it achieves this by a combination of
partitioning, replicating and caching naming data. The objects named are primarily
computers, name servers and mail hosts. Computer (host) name–to–IP address
mappings change relatively rarely, as do the identities of name servers and mail hosts,
so caching and replication occur in a relatively clement environment.
The DNS allows naming data to become inconsistent. That is, if naming data is
changed, then other servers may provide clients with stale data for periods on the order
of days. None of the replication techniques explored in Chapter 18 is applied. However,
inconsistency is of no consequence until such time as a client attempts to use stale data.
The DNS does not address itself to how staleness of addresses is detected.
Apart from computers, the DNS also names one particular type of service – the
mail service – on a per-domain basis. DNS assumes there to be only one mail service per
addressed domain, so users do not have to include the name of this service explicitly in
names. Electronic mail applications transparently select this service by using the
appropriate type of query when contacting DNS servers.
In summary, the DNS stores a limited variety of naming data, but this is sufficient
in so far as applications such as electronic mail impose their own naming schemes on
top of domain names. It might be argued that the DNS database represents the lowest
common denominator of what would be considered useful by the many user
communities on the Internet. The DNS was not designed to be the only name service in
the Internet; it coexists with local name and directory services that store data most
pertinent to local needs (such as Sun’s Network Information Service, which stores
encoded passwords, for example, or Microsoft’s Active Directory Services
[www.microsoft.com I], which stores detailed information about all the resources within
a domain).
What remains as a potential problem for the DNS design is its rigidity with respect
to changes in the structure of the name space, and the lack of ability to customize the
name space to suit local needs. These aspects of naming design are taken up by the case
study of the Global Name Service in Section 13.4. But before that, we consider directory
services.


===== page 602 =====
584 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
13.3 Directory services
We have described how name services store collections of <name, attribute> pairs, and
how the attributes are looked up from a name. It is natural to consider the dual of this
arrangement, in which attributes are used as values to be looked up. In these services,
textual names can be considered to be just another attribute. Sometimes users wish to
find a particular person or resource, but they do not know its name, only some of its other
attributes. For example, a user may ask: ‘What is the name of the user with telephone
number 020-555 9980?’ Likewise, sometimes users require a service, but they are not
concerned with what system entity supplies that service, as long as the service is
conveniently accessible. For example, a user might ask, ‘Which computers in this
building are Macintoshes running the Mac OS X operating system?’ or ‘Where can I
print a high-resolution colour image?’
A service that stores collections of bindings between names and attributes and that
looks up entries that match attribute-based specifications is called a directory service.
Examples are Microsoft’s Active Directory Services, X.500 and its cousin LDAP
(described in Section 13.5), Univers [Bowman et al. 1990] and Profile [Peterson 1988].
Directory services are sometimes called yellow pages services, and conventional name
services are correspondingly called white pages services, in an analogy with the
traditional types of telephone directory. Directory services are also sometimes known as
attribute-based name services.
A directory service returns the sets of attributes of any objects found to match
some specified attributes. So, for example, the request ‘TelephoneNumber = 020 555
9980’ might return {‘Name = John Smith’, ‘TelephoneNumber = 020 555 9980’,
‘emailAddress = john@dcs.gormenghast.ac.uk’, ...}. The client may specify that only a
subset of the attributes is of interest – for example, just the email addresses of matching
objects. X.500 and some other directory services also allow objects to be looked up by
conventional hierarchic textual names. The Universal Directory and Discovery Service
(UDDI), which was presented in Section 9.4, provides both white pages and yellow
pages services to provide information about organizations and the web services they
offer.
UDDI aside, the term discovery service normally denotes the special case of a
directory service for services provided by devices in a spontaneous networking
environment. As Section 1.3.2 described, devices in spontaneous networks are liable to
connect and disconnect unpredictably. One core difference between a discovery service
and other directory services is that the address of a directory service is normally well
known and preconfigured in clients, whereas a device entering a spontaneous
networking environment has to resort to multicast navigation, at least the first time it
accesses the local discovery service. Section 19.2.1 describes discovery services in
detail.
Attributes are clearly more powerful than names as designators of objects:
programs can be written to select objects according to precise attribute specifications
where names might not be known. Another advantage of attributes is that they do not
expose the structure of organizations to the outside world, as do organizationally
partitioned names. However, the relative simplicity of use of textual names makes them
unlikely to be replaced by attribute-based naming in many applications.


===== page 603 =====
SECTION 13.4 CASE STUDY: THE GLOBAL NAME SERVICE 585
13.4 Case study: The Global Name Service
A Global Name Service (GNS) was designed and implemented by Lampson and
colleagues at the DEC Systems Research Center [Lampson 1986] to provide facilities
for resource location, mail addressing and authentication. The design goals of the GNS
have already been listed at the end of Section 13.1; they reflect the fact that a name
service for use in an internetwork must support a naming database that may extend to
include the names of millions of computers and (eventually) email addresses for billions
of users. The designers of the GNS also recognized that the naming database is likely to
have a long lifetime and that it must continue to operate effectively while it grows from
small to large scale and while the network on which it is based evolves. The structure of
the name space may change during that time to reflect changes in organizational
structures. The service should accommodate changes in the names of the individuals,
organizations and groups that it holds, and changes in the naming structure such as those
that occur when one company is taken over by another. In this description, we focus on
those features of the design that enable it to accommodate such changes.
The potentially large naming database and the scale of the distributed environment
in which the GNS is intended to operate make the use of caching essential and render it
extremely difficult to maintain complete consistency between all copies of a database
entry. The cache consistency strategy adopted relies on the assumption that updates to
the database will be infrequent and that slow dissemination of updates is acceptable,
since clients can detect and recover from the use of out-of-date naming data.
The GNS manages a naming database that is composed of a tree of directories
holding names and values. Directories are named by multi-part pathnames referred to a
root, or relative to a working directory, much like file names in a UNIX file system. Each
directory is also assigned an integer, which serves as a unique directory identifier (DI).
In this section, we use names in italics when referring to the DI of a directory, so that
EC is the identifier of the EC directory. A directory contains a list of names and
references. The values stored at the leaves of the directory tree are organized into value
trees, so that the attributes associated with names can be structured values.
Names in the GNS have two parts: <directory name,value name>. The first part
identifies a directory; the second refers to a value tree, or some portion of a value tree.
For example, see Figure 13.7, in which the DIs are illustrated as small integers (although
they are actually chosen from a range of integers to ensure uniqueness). The attributes
of a user Peter.Smith in the directory QMUL would be stored in the value tree named
<EC/UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith>. The value tree includes a password, which can be
referenced as <EC/UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith/password>, and several mail addresses,
each of which would be listed in the value tree as a single node with the name
<EC/UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith/mailboxes>.
The directory tree is partitioned and stored in many servers, with each partition
replicated in several servers. The consistency of the tree is maintained in the face of two
or more concurrent updates – for example, two users may simultaneously attempt to
create entries with the same name, and only one should succeed. Replicated directories
present a second consistency problem; this is addressed by an asynchronous update
distribution algorithm that ensures eventual consistency, but with no guarantee that all
copies are always current.


===== page 604 =====
586 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Figure 13.7 GNS directory tree and value tree for user Peter.Smith
DI: 599 (EC)
UK FR
DI: 543 DI: 574
AC
DI: 437
DI: 322 QMUL
Peter.Smith
mailboxes password
Alpha Beta Gamma
Accommodatingchange • We now turn to the aspects of the design that are concerned
with accommodating growth and change in the structure of the naming database. At the
level of clients and administrators, growth is accommodated through extension of the
directory tree in the usual manner. But we may wish to integrate the naming trees of two
previously separate GNS services. For example, how could we integrate the database
rooted at the EC directory shown in Figure 13.7 with another database for NORTH
AMERICA?Figure 13.8 shows a new root, WORLD, introduced above the existing roots
of the two trees to be merged. This is a straightforward technique, but how does it affect
clients that continue to use names that are referred to what was ‘the root’ before
integration took place? For example, </UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith> is a name used by
clients before integration. It is an absolute name (since it begins with the symbol for the
root, ‘/’), but the root it refers to is EC, not WORLD. EC and NORTH AMERICA are
working roots – initial contexts against which names beginning with the root ‘/’ are to
be looked up.
Figure 13.8 Merging trees under a new root
DI: 633 (WORLD)
Well-known directories:
#599 = #633/EC
#642 = #633/NORTH AMERICA EC NORTH AMERICA
DI: 599 DI: 642
DI: 543 UK FR DI: 574 DI: 732 US CANADA DI: 457


===== page 605 =====
SECTION 13.4 CASE STUDY: THE GLOBAL NAME SERVICE 587
Figure 13.9 Restructuring the directory
DI: 633 (WORLD)
Well-known directories:
#599 = #633/EC
#642 = #633/NORTH AMERICA
EC NORTH AMERICA
DI: 599 DI: 642
UK FR US US CANADA
DI: 543 DI: 574 DI: 732 DI: 457
#633/EC/US
The existence of unique directory identifiers can be used to solve this problem.
The working root for each program must be identified as part of its execution
environment (much as is done for a program’s working directory). When a client in the
European Community uses a name of the form </UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith>, its
local user agent, which is aware of the working root, prefixes the directory identifier EC
(#599), thus producing the name <#599/UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith>. The user agent
passes this derived name in the lookup request to a GNS server. The user agent may deal
similarly with relative names referred to working directories. Clients that are aware of
the new configuration may also supply absolute names to the GNS server, which are
referred to the conceptual super-root directory containing all directory identifiers – for
example, <WORLD/EC/UK/AC/QMUL, Peter.Smith> – but the design cannot assume
that all clients will be updated to take account of such a change.
The technique described above solves the logical problem, allowing users and
client programs to continue to use names that are defined relative to an old root even
when a new real root is inserted, but it leaves an implementation problem: in a
distributed naming database that may contain millions of directories, how can the GNS
service locate a directory given only its identifier, such as #599? The solution adopted
by the GNS is to list those directories that are used as working roots, such as EC, in a
table of ‘well-known directories’ held in the current real root directory of the naming
database. Whenever the real root of the naming database changes, as it does in Figure
13.8, all GNS servers are informed of the new location of the real root. They can then
interpret names of the form WORLD/EC/UK/AC/QMUL (referred to the real root) in
the usual way, and they can interpret names of the form #599/UK/AC/QMUL by using
the table of ‘well-known directories’ to translate them to full pathnames beginning at the
real root.
The GNS also supports the restructuring of the database to accommodate
organizational change. Suppose that the United States becomes part of the European
Community (!). Figure 13.9 shows the new directory tree. But if the US subtree is simply
moved to the EC directory, names beginning WORLD/NORTH AMERICA/US will no
longer work. The solution adopted by the GNS is to insert a ‘symbolic link’ in place of
the original US entry (shown in bold in Figure 13.9). The GNS directory lookup
procedure interprets the link as a redirection to the US directory in its new location.


===== page 606 =====
588 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Discussionofthe GNS • The GNS is descended from Grapevine [Birrell et al. 1982] and
Clearinghouse [Oppen and Dalal 1983], two successful naming systems developed
primarily for the purposes of mail delivery by the Xerox Corporation. The GNS
successfully addresses needs for scalability and reconfigurability, but the solution
adopted for merging and moving directory trees results in a requirement for a database
(the table of well-known directories) that must be replicated at every node. In a large-
scale network, reconfigurations may occur at any level, and this table could grow to a
large size, conflicting with the scalability goal.
13.5 Case study: The X.500 Directory Service
X.500 is a directory service in the sense defined in Section 13.3. It can be used in the
same way as a conventional name service, but it is primarily used to satisfy descriptive
queries and is designed to discover the names and attributes of other users or system
resources. Users may have a variety of requirements for searching and browsing in a
directory of network users, organizations and system resources to obtain information
about the entities that the directory contains. The uses for such a service are likely to be
quite diverse. They range from enquiries that are directly analogous to the use of
telephone directories, such as a simple ‘white pages’ access to obtain a user’s electronic
mail address or a ‘yellow pages’ query aimed, for example, at obtaining the names and
telephone numbers of garages specializing in the repair of a particular make of car, to
the use of the directory to access personal details such as job roles, dietary habits or even
photographic images of the individuals.
Such queries may originate from users, in the ‘yellow pages’example mentioned
above, or from processes, when they may be used to identify services to meet a
functional requirement.
Individuals and organizations can use a directory service to make available a wide
range of information about themselves and the resources that they wish to offer for use
in the network. Users can search the directory for specific information with only partial
knowledge of its name, structure or content.
The ITU and ISO standards organizations defined the X.500 Directory Service
[ITU/ISO 1997] as a network service intended to meet these requirements. The standard
refers to it as a service for access to information about ‘real-world entities’, but it is also
likely to be used for access to information about hardware and software services and
devices. X.500 is specified as an application-level service in the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) set of standards, but its design does not depend to any significant
extent on the other OSI standards, and it can be viewed as a design for a general-purpose
directory service. We outline the design of the X.500 directory service and its
implementation here. Readers interested in a more detailed description of X.500 and
methods for its implementation are advised to study Rose’s book on the subject [Rose
1992]. X.500 is also the basis for LDAP (discussed below), and it is used in the DCE
directory service [OSF 1997].


===== page 607 =====
SECTION 13.5 CASE STUDY: THE X.500 DIRECTORY SERVICE 589
Figure 13.10 X.500 service architecture
DUA
DSA DSA
DUA DSA
DSA
DSA
DUA
DSA
The data stored in X.500 servers is organized in a tree structure with named nodes,
as in the case of the other name servers discussed in this chapter, but in X.500 a wide
range of attributes are stored at each node in the tree, and access is possible not just by
name but also by searching for entries with any required combination of attributes.
The X.500 name tree is called the Directory Information Tree (DIT), and the
entire directory structure including the data associated with the nodes, is called the
Directory Information Base (DIB). There is intended to be a single integrated DIB
containing information provided by organizations throughout the world, with portions
of the DIB located in individual X.500 servers. Typically, a medium-sized or large
organization would provide at least one server. Clients access the directory by
establishing a connection to a server and issuing access requests. Clients can contact any
server with an enquiry. If the data required are not in the segment of the DIB held by the
contacted server, it will either invoke other servers to resolve the query or redirect the
client to another server.
In the terminology of the X.500 standard, servers are Directory Service Agents
(DSAs), and their clients are termed Directory User Agents (DUAs). Figure 13.10
shows the software architecture and one of the several possible navigation models, with
each DUA client process interacting with a single DSA process, which accesses other
DSAs as necessary to satisfy requests.
Each entry in the DIB consists of a name and a set of attributes. As in other name
servers, the full name of an entry corresponds to a path through the DIT from the root of
the tree to the entry. In addition to full or absolute names, a DUA can establish a context,
which includes a base node, and then use shorter relative names that give the path from
the base node to the named entry.
Figure 13.11 shows the portion of the Directory Information Tree that includes the
notional University of Gormenghast in Great Britain, and Figure 13.12 is one of the
associated DIB entries. The data structure forthe entries in the DIB and the DIT is very
flexible. A DIB entry consists of a set of attributes, where an attribute has a type and one
or more values. The type of each attribute is denoted by a type name (for example,
countryName, organizationName, commonName, telephoneNumber, mailbox,
objectClass). New attribute types can be defined if they are required. For each distinct


===== page 608 =====
590 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Figure 13.11 Part of the X.500 Directory Information Tree
X.500 Service (root)
... France (country) Great Britain (country) Greece (country) ...
...
... BT Plc (organization) University of Gormenghast (organization)
... Computing Service (organizationalUnit)
Department of Computer Science (organizationalUnit)
Engineering Department (organizationalUnit)...
... Departmental Staff (organizationalUnit)
ely (applicationProcess)
Research Students (organizationalUnit)...
... Alice Flintstone (person)...Pat King (person) James Healey (perso n ) Janet Papworth (person)...
type name there is a corresponding type definition, which includes a type description
and a syntax definition in the ASN.1 notation (a standard notation for syntax definitions)
defining representations for all permissible values of the type.
DIB entries are classified in a manner similar to the object class structures found
in object-oriented programming languages. Each entry includes an objectClass attribute,
which determines the class (or classes) of the object to which an entry refers.
Organization, organizationalPerson and document are all examples of objectClass
values. Further classes can be defined as they are required. The definition of a class
determines which attributes are mandatory and which are optional for entries of the
given class. The definitions of classes are organized in an inheritance hierarchy in which
all classes except one (called topClass) must contain an objectClass attribute, and the
value of the objectClass attribute must be the names of one or more classes. If there are
severalobjectClass values, the object inherits the mandatory and optional attributes of
each of the classes.
The name of a DIB entry (the name that determines its position in the DIT) is
determined by selecting one or more of its attributes as distinguished attributes. The
attributes selected for this purpose are referred to as the entry’s Distinguished Name
(DN).


===== page 609 =====
SECTION 13.5 CASE STUDY: THE X.500 DIRECTORY SERVICE 591
Figure 13.12 An X.500 DIB Entry
info
Alice Flintstone, Departmental Staff, Department of Computer Science,(cid:3)
University of Gormenghast, GB
commonName uid
Alice.L.Flintstone(cid:3) alf(cid:3)
Alice.Flintstone(cid:3) mail
Alice Flintstone(cid:3) alf@dcs.gormenghast.ac.uk(cid:3)
A. Flintstone Alice.Flintstone@dcs.gormenghast.ac.uk
surname roomNumber
Flintstone Z42
telephoneNumber userClass
+44 986 33 4604 Research Fellow
Now we can consider the methods by which the directory is accessed. There are
two main types of access request:
read: An absolute or relative name (a domain name in X.500 terminology) for an
entry is given, together with a list of attributes to be read (or an indication that all
attributes are required). The DSA locates the named entry by navigating in the DIT,
passing requests to other DSA servers where it does not hold relevant parts of the tree.
It retrieves the required attributes and returns them to the client.
search: This is an attribute-based access request. A base name and a filter expression
are supplied as arguments. The base name specifies the node in the DIT from which
the search is to commence; the filter expression is a boolean expression that is to be
evaluated for every node below the base node. The filter specifies a search criterion:
a logical combination of tests on the values of any of the attributes in an entry. The
search command returns a list of names (domain names) for all of the entries below
the base node for which the filter evaluates to TRUE.
For example, a filter might be constructed and applied to find the
commonNames of members of staff who occupy room Z42 in the Department of
Computer Science at the University of Gormenghast (Figure 13.12). A read request
could then be used to obtain any or all of the attributes of those DIB entries.
Searching can be quite costly when it is applied to large portions of the
directory tree (which may reside in several servers). Additional arguments can be
supplied to search to restrict the scope, the time for which the search is allowed to
continue and the size of the list of entries that is returned.
AdministrationandupdatingoftheDIB • The DSA interface includes operations for
adding, deleting and modifying entries. Access control is provided for both queries and
updating operations, so access to parts of the DIT may be restricted to certain users or
classes of user.


===== page 610 =====
592 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
The DIB is partitioned, with the expectation that each organization will provide at
least one server holding the details of the entities in that organization. Portions of the
DIB may be replicated in several servers.
As a standard (or a ‘recommendation’ in CCITT terminology), X.500 does not
address implementation issues. However, it is quite clear that any implementation
involving multiple servers in a wide area network must rely on extensive use of
replication and caching techniques to avoid too much redirection of queries.
One implementation, described by Rose [1992], is a system developed at
University College, London, known as QUIPU [Kille 1991]. In this implementation,
both caching and replication are performed at the level of individual DIB entries, and at
the level of collections of entries descended from the same node. It is assumed that
values may become inconsistent after an update, and the time interval in which the
consistency is restored may be several minutes. This form of update dissemination is
generally considered acceptable for directory service applications.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol • X.500’s assumption that organizations would
provide information about themselves in public directories within a common system has
proved largely unfounded. Equally, its compexity has meant that its uptake has been
relatively modest.
A group at the University of Michigan proposed a more lightweight approach
called the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), in which a DUA accesses
X.500 directory services directly over TCP/IP instead of the upper layers of the ISO
protocol stack. This is described in RFC 2251 [Wahl et al. 1997]. LDAP also simplifies
the interface to X.500 in other ways: for example, it provides a relatively simple API and
it replaces ASN.1 encoding with textual encoding.
Although the LDAP specification is based on X.500, LDAP does not require it.
An implementation may use any other directory server that obeys the simpler LDAP
specification, as opposed to the X.500 specification. For example, Microsoft’s Active
Directory Services provides an LDAP interface.
Unlike X.500, LDAP has been widely adopted, particularly for intranet directory
services. It provides secure access to directory data through authentication.
13.6 Summary
This chapter has described the design and implementation of name services in
distributed systems. Name services store the attributes of objects in a distributed system
– in particular, their addresses – and return these attributes when a textual name is
supplied to be looked up.
The main requirements for the name service are an ability to handle an arbitrary
number of names, a long lifetime, high availability, the isolation of faults and the
tolerance of mistrust.
The primary design issue is the structure of the name space – the syntactic rules
governing names. A related issue is the resolution model, which sets out the rules by
which a multi-component name is resolved to a set of attributes. The set of bound names
must be managed. Most designs consider the name space to be divided into domains –


===== page 611 =====
SECTION 13.6 SUMMARY 593
discrete sections of the name space, each of which is associated with a single authority
controlling the binding of names within it.
The implementation of the name service may span different organizations and
user communities. The collection of bindings between names and attributes, in other
words, is stored at multiple name servers, each of which stores at least part of the set of
names within a naming domain. The question of navigation therefore arises – by what
procedure can a name be resolved when the necessary information is stored at several
sites? The types of navigation that are supported are iterative, multicast, recursive
server-controlled and non-recursive server-controlled.
Another important aspect of the implementation of a name service is the use of
replication and caching. Both of these assist in making the service highly available, and
both also reduce the time taken to resolve a name.
This chapter has considered two main cases of name service design and
implementation. The Domain Name System is widely used for naming computers and
addressing electronic mail across the Internet; it achieves good response times through
replication and caching. The Global Name Service is a design that has tackled the issue
of reconfiguring the name space as organizational changes occur.
The chapter also considered directory services, which provide data about
matching objects and services when clients supply attribute-based descriptions. X.500
is a model for directory services that can range in scope from individual organizations
to global directories. It has been taken up more widely for use in intranets since the
arrival of the LDAP software.
EXERCISES
13.1 Describe the names (including identifiers) and attributes used in a distributed file service
such as NFS (see Chapter 12). page 566
13.2 Discuss the problems raised by the use of aliases in a name service, and indicate how, if
at all, these may be overcome. page 571
13.3 Explain why iterative navigation is necessary in a name service in which different name
spaces are partially integrated, such as the file-naming scheme provided by NFS.
page 574
13.4 Describe the problem of unbound names in multicast navigation. What is implied by the
installation of a server for responding to lookups of unbound names? page 575
13.5 How does caching help a name service’s availability? page 576
13.6 Discuss the absence of a syntactic distinction (such as the use of a final ‘.’) between
absolute and relative names in the DNS. page 571
13.7 Investigate your local configuration of DNS domains and servers. You may find a
program such as dig or nslookup installed, which enables you to carry out individual
name server queries. page 578


===== page 612 =====
594 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
13.8 Why do DNS root servers hold entries for two-level names such as yahoo.com and
purdue.edu, rather than one-level names such as edu and com? page 579
13.9 Which other name server addresses do DNS name servers hold by default, and why?
page 579
13.10 Why might a DNS client choose recursive navigation rather than iterative navigation?
What is the relevance of the recursive navigation option to concurrency within a name
server? page 581
13.11 When might a DNS server provide multiple answers to a single name lookup, and why?
page 581
13.12 The GNS does not guarantee that all copies of entries in the naming database are up-to-
date. How are clients of the GNS likely to become aware that they have been given an
out-of-date entry? Under what circumstances might it be harmful? page 585
13.13 Discuss the potential advantages and drawbacks of the use of an X.500 directory service
in place of the DNS and the Internet mail delivery programs. Sketch the design of a mail
delivery system for an internetwork in which all mail users and mail hosts are registered
in an X.500 database. page 588
13.14 What security issues are liable to be relevant to a directory service such as X500
operating within an organization such as a university? page 588


===== page 613 =====
14
TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
14.1 Introduction
14.2 Clocks, events and process states
14.3 Synchronizing physical clocks
14.4 Logical time and logical clocks
14.5 Global states
14.6 Distributed debugging
14.7 Summary
In this chapter, we introduce some topics related to the issue of time in distributed
systems. Time is an important practical issue. For example, we require computers around
the world to timestamp electronic commerce transactions consistently. Time is also an
important theoretical construct in understanding how distributed executions unfold. But
time is problematic in distributed systems. Each computer may have its own physical
clock, but the clocks typically deviate, and we cannot synchronize them perfectly. We
examine algorithms for synchronizing physical clocks approximately and then go on to
explain logical clocks, including vector clocks, which are a tool for ordering events without
knowing precisely when they occurred.
The absence of global physical time makes it difficult to find out the state of our
distributed programs as they execute. We often need to know what state process A is in
when process B is in a certain state, but we cannot rely on physical clocks to know what
is true at the same time. The second half of the chapter examines algorithms to determine
global states of distributed computations despite the lack of global time.
595


===== page 614 =====
596 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
14.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces fundamental concepts and algorithms related to monitoring
distributed systems as their execution unfolds, and to timing the events that occur in their
executions.
Time is an important and interesting issue in distributed systems, for several
reasons. First, time is a quantity we often want to measure accurately. In order to know
at what time of day a particular event occurred at a particular computer it is necessary to
synchronize its clock with an authoritative, external source of time. For example, an
eCommerce transaction involves events at a merchant’s computer and at a bank’s
computer. It is important, for auditing purposes, that those events are timestamped
accurately.
Second, algorithms that depend upon clock synchronization have been developed
for several problems in distribution [Liskov 1993]. These include maintaining the
consistency of distributed data (the use of timestamps to serialize transactions is
discussed in Section 16.6), checking the authenticity of a request sent to a server (a
version of the Kerberos authentication protocol, discussed in Chapter 11, depends on
loosely synchronized clocks) and eliminating the processing of duplicate updates (see,
for example, Ladin et al. [1992]).
Measuring time can be problematic due to the existence of multiple frames of
reference. Einstein demonstrated, in his Special Theory of Relativity, the intriguing
consequences that follow from the observation that the speed of light is constant for all
observers, regardless of their relative velocity. He proved from this assumption, among
other things, that two events that are judged to be simultaneous in one frame of reference
are not necessarily simultaneous according to observers in other frames of reference that
are moving relative to it. For example, an observer on the Earth and an observer
travelling away from the Earth in a spaceship will disagree on the time interval between
events, the more so as their relative speed increases.
The relative order of two events can even be reversed for two different observers.
But this cannot happen if one event causes the other to occur. In that case, the physical
effect follows the physical cause for all observers, although the time elapsed between
cause and effect can vary. The timing of physical events was thus proved to be relative
to the observer, and Newton’s notion of absolute physical time was shown to be without
foundation. There is no special physical clock in the universe to which we can appeal
when we want to measure intervals of time.
The notion of physical time is also problematic in a distributed system. This is not
due to the effects of special relativity, which are negligible or nonexistent for normal
computers (unless one counts computers travelling in spaceships!). Rather, the problem
is based on a similar limitation in our ability to timestamp events at different nodes
sufficiently accurately to know the order in which any pair of events occurred, or
whether they occurred simultaneously. There is no absolute, global time to which we
can appeal. And yet we sometimes need to observe distributed systems and establish
whether certain states of affairs occurred at the same time. For example, in object-
oriented systems we need to be able to establish whether references to a particular object
no longer exist – whether the object has become garbage (in which case we can free its
memory). Establishing this requires observations of the states of processes (to find out


===== page 615 =====
SECTION 14.2 CLOCKS, EVENTS AND PROCESS STATES 597
whether they contain references) and of the communication channels between processes
(in case messages containing references are in transit).
In the first half of this chapter, we examine methods whereby computer clocks can
be approximately synchronized, using message passing. We go on to introduce logical
clocks, including vector clocks, which are used to define an order of events without
measuring the physical time at which they occurred.
In the second half, we describe algorithms whose purpose is to capture global
states of distributed systems as they execute.
14.2 Clocks, events and process states
Chapter 2 presented an introductory model of interaction between the processes within
a distributed system. Here we refine that model in order to help us to understand how to
characterize the system’s evolution as it executes, and how to timestamp the events in a
system’s execution that interest users. We begin by considering how to order and
timestamp the events that occur at a single process.
We take a distributed system to consist of a collection (cid:132) of N processes
p(cid:15)i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)N. Each process executes on a single processor, and the processors do
i
not share memory (Chapter 6 briefly considered the case of processes that share
memory). Each process p in (cid:132) has a state s that, in general, it transforms as it
i i
executes. The process’s state includes the values of all the variables within it. Its state
may also include the values of any objects in its local operating system environment that
it affects, such as files. We assume that processes cannot communicate with one another
in any way except by sending messages through the network. So, for example, if the
processes operate robot arms connected to their respective nodes in the system, then they
are not allowed to communicate by shaking one another’s robot hands!
As each process p executes it takes a series of actions, each of which is either a
i
messagesend or receive operation, or an operation that transforms p ’s state – one that
i
changes one or more of the values in s . In practice, we may choose to use a high-level
i
description of the actions, according to the application. For example, if the processes in
(cid:132)(cid:3)are engaged in an eCommerce application, then the actions may be ones such as
‘client dispatched order message’ or ‘merchant server recorded transaction to log’.
We define an event to be the occurrence of a single action that a process carries
out as it executes – a communication action or a state-transforming action. The sequence
of events within a single process p can be placed in a single, total ordering, which we
i
denote by the relation (cid:111)i between the events. That is, e(cid:111)i e' if and only if the event e
occurs before e(cid:99) at p . This ordering is well defined, whether or not the process is multi-
i
threaded, since we have assumed that the process executes on a single processor.
Now we can define the history of process p to be the series of events that take
i
place within it, ordered as we have described by the relation (cid:111)i:
0 1 2
history(p (cid:12) = h = <e (cid:15)e (cid:15)e (cid:15)(cid:125)>
i i i i i
Clocks • We have seen how to order the events at a process, but not how to timestamp
them – i.e., to assign to them a date and time of day. Computers each contain their own
physical clocks. These clocks are electronic devices that count oscillations occurring in


===== page 616 =====
598 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.1 Skew between computer clocks in a distributed system
Network
a crystal at a definite frequency, and typically divide this count and store the result in a
counter register. Clock devices can be programmed to generate interrupts at regular
intervals in order that, for example, timeslicing can be implemented; however, we shall
not concern ourselves with this aspect of clock operation.
The operating system reads the node’s hardware clock value, H (cid:11)t(cid:12), scales it and
i
adds an offset so as to produce a software clock C (cid:11)t(cid:12) = (cid:68)H (cid:11)t(cid:12)+(cid:69) that approximately
i i
measures real, physical time t for process p . In other words, when the real time in an
i
absolute frame of reference is t, C (cid:11)t(cid:12) is the reading on the software clock. For example,
i
C (cid:11)t(cid:12) could be the 64-bit value of the number of nanoseconds that have elapsed at time
i
tsince a convenient reference time. In general, the clock is not completely accurate, so
C (cid:11)t(cid:12) will differ from t. Nonetheless, if C behaves sufficiently well (we shall examine
i i
the notion of clock correctness shortly), we canuse its value to timestamp any event at
p . Note that successive events will correspond to different timestamps only if the clock
i
resolution – the period between updates of the clock value – is smaller than the time
interval between successive events. The rate at which events occur depends on such
factors as the length of the processor instruction cycle.
Clockskewandclockdrift • Computer clocks, like any others, tend not to be in perfect
agreement (Figure 14.1). The instantaneous difference between the readings of any two
clocks is called their skew.Also, the crystal-based clocks used in computers are, like any
other clocks, subject to clock drift, which means that they count time at different rates,
and so diverge. The underlying oscillators are subject to physical variations, with the
consequence that their frequencies of oscillation differ. Moreover, even the same
clock’s frequency varies with temperature. Designs exist that attempt to compensate for
this variation, but they cannot eliminate it. The difference in the oscillation period
between two clocks might be extremely small, but the difference accumulated over
many oscillations leads to an observable difference in the counters registered by two
clocks, no matter how accurately they were initialized to the same value. A clock’s drift
rate is the change in the offset (difference in reading) between the clock and a nominal
perfect reference clock per unit of time measured by the reference clock. For ordinary
clocks based on a quartz crystal this is about 10–6 seconds/second, giving a difference
of 1 second every 1,000,000 seconds, or 11.6 days. The drift rate of ‘high-precision’
quartz clocks is about 10–7 or 10–8.
CoordinatedUniversalTime • Computer clocks can be synchronized to external sources
of highly accurate time. The most accurate physical clocks use atomic oscillators, whose
drift rate is about one part in 1013. The output of these atomic clocks is used as the


===== page 617 =====
SECTION 14.3 SYNCHRONIZINGPHYSICAL CLOCKS 599
standard for elapsed real time, known as International Atomic Time. Since 1967, the
standard second has been defined as 9,192,631,770 periods of transition between the
two hyperfine levels of the ground state of Caesium-133 (Cs133).
Seconds and years and other time units that we use are rooted in astronomical
time. They were originally defined in terms of the rotation of the Earth on its axis and
its rotation about the Sun. However, the period of the Earth’s rotation about its axis is
gradually getting longer, primarily because of tidal friction; atmospheric effects and
convection currents within the Earth’s core also cause short-term increases and
decreases in the period. So astronomical time and atomic time have a tendency to get out
of step.
Coordinated Universal Time – abbreviated as UTC (from the French equivalent)
– is an international standard for timekeeping. It is based on atomic time, but a so-called
‘leap second’ is inserted – or, more rarely, deleted – occasionally to keep it in step with
astronomical time. UTC signals are synchronized and broadcast regularly from land-
based radio stations and satellites covering many parts of the world. For example, in the
USA, the radio station WWV broadcasts time signals on several shortwave frequencies.
Satellite sources include the Global Positioning System (GPS).
Receivers are available commercially. Compared with ‘perfect’ UTC, the signals
received from land-based stations have an accuracy on the order of 0.1–10 milliseconds,
depending on the station used. Signals received from GPS satellites are accurate to about
1 microsecond. Computers with receivers attached can synchronize their clocks with
these timing signals.
14.3 Synchronizing physical clocks
In order to know at what time of day events occur at the processes in our distributed
system(cid:132) – for example, for accountancy purposes – it is necessary to synchronize the
processes’ clocks, C , with an authoritative, external source of time. This is external
i
synchronization. And if the clocks C are synchronized with one another to a known
i
degree of accuracy, then we can measure the interval between two events occurring at
different computers by appealing to their local clocks, even though they are not
necessarily synchronized to an external source of time. This is internal synchronization.
We define these two modes of synchronization more closely as follows, over an interval
of real time I:
External synchronization: For a synchronization bound D(cid:33)0, and for a source S of
UTC time, S(cid:11)t(cid:12)–C (cid:11)t(cid:12) <D, for i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)N and for all real times t in I. Another
i
way of saying this is that the clocks C are accurate to within the bound D.
i
Internal synchronization: For a synchronization bound D(cid:33)0, C (cid:11)t(cid:12)–C (cid:11)t(cid:12) (cid:31)D
i j
for i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)N, and for all real times t in I. Another way of saying this is that
the clocks C agree within the bound D.
i
Clocks that are internally synchronized are not necessarily externally synchronized,
since they may drift collectively from an external source of time even though they agree
with one another. However, it follows from the definitions that if the system (cid:132) is


===== page 618 =====
600 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
externally synchronized with a bound D, then the same system is internally
synchronized with a bound of 2D.
Various notions of correctness for clocks have been suggested. It is common to
define a hardware clock H to be correct if its drift rate falls within a known bound (cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:33)(cid:3)(cid:19)(cid:3)
(a value derived from one supplied by the manufacturer, such as 10–6 seconds/second).
This means that the error in measuring the interval between real times t and t(cid:99) (t(cid:99)(cid:33)t) is
bounded:
(cid:11)1–(cid:85)(cid:12)(cid:11)t(cid:99)–t(cid:12)(cid:100)H(cid:11)t(cid:99)(cid:12)–H(cid:11)t(cid:12)(cid:100)(cid:11)1+(cid:85)(cid:12)(cid:11)t(cid:99)–t(cid:12)
This condition forbids jumps in the value of hardware clocks (during normal operation).
Sometimes we also require our software clocks to obey the condition but a weaker
condition of monotonicity may suffice. Monotonicity is the condition that a clock C only
ever advances:
t(cid:99)(cid:33)t(cid:159)C(cid:11)t(cid:99)(cid:12)(cid:33)C(cid:11)t(cid:12)
For example, the UNIX make facility is a tool that is used to compile only those source
files that have been modified since they were last compiled. The modification dates of
each corresponding pair of source and object files are compared to determine this
condition. If a computer whose clock was running fast set its clock back after compiling
a source file but before the file was changed, the source file might appear to have been
modified prior to the compilation. Erroneously, make will not recompile the source file.
We can achieve monotonicity despite the fact that a clock is found to be running
fast. We need only change the rate at which updates are made to the time as given to
applications. This can be achieved in software without changing the rate at which the
underlying hardware clock ticks – recall that C (cid:11)t(cid:12) = (cid:68)H (cid:11)t(cid:12)+(cid:69), where we are free to
i i
choose the values of (cid:68) and (cid:69).
A hybrid correctness condition that is sometimes applied is to require that a clock
obeys the monotonicity condition, and that its drift rate is bounded between
synchronization points, but to allow the clock value to jump ahead at synchronization
points.
A clock that does not keep to whatever correctness conditions apply is defined to
befaulty. A clock’s crash failure is said to occur when the clock stops ticking altogether;
any other clock failure is an arbitrary failure. A historical example of an arbitrary failure
is that of a clock with the ‘Y2K bug’, which broke the monotonicity condition by
registering the date after 31 December 1999 as 1 January 1900 instead of 2000; another
example is a clock whose batteries are very low and whose drift rate suddenly becomes
very large.
Note that clocks do not have to be accurate to be correct, according to the
definitions. Since the goal may be internal rather than external synchronization, the
criteria for correctness are only concerned with the proper functioning of the clock’s
‘mechanism’, not its absolute setting.
We now describe algorithms for external synchronization and for internal
synchronization.


===== page 619 =====
SECTION 14.3 SYNCHRONIZINGPHYSICAL CLOCKS 601
14.3.1 Synchronizationina synchronous system
We begin by considering the simplest possible case: of internal synchronization between
two processes in a synchronous distributed system. In a synchronous system, bounds are
known for the drift rate of clocks, the maximum message transmission delay, and the
time required to execute each step of a process (see Section 2.4.1).
One process sends the time t on its local clock to the other in a message m. In
principle, the receiving process could set its clock to the time t+T , where T is
trans trans
the time taken to transmit m between them. The two clocks would then agree (since the
aim is internal synchronization, it does not matter whether the sending process’s clock
is accurate).
Unfortunately, T is subject to variation and is unknown. In general, other
trans
processes are competing for resources with the processes to be synchronized at their
respective nodes, and other messages compete with m for the network resources.
Nonetheless, there is always a minimum transmission time, min, that would be obtained
if no other processes executed and no other network traffic existed; min can be measured
or conservatively estimated.
In a synchronous system, by definition, there is also an upper bound max on the
time taken to transmit any message. Let the uncertainty in the message transmission time
be u, so that u = (cid:11)max–min(cid:12). If the receiver sets its clock to be t+min, then the
clock skew may be as much as u, since the message may in fact have taken time max to
arrive. Similarly, if it sets its clock to t+max, the skew may again be as large as u. If,
however, it sets its clock to the halfway point, t+(cid:11)max+min(cid:12)(cid:101)2, then the skew is at
most u(cid:101)2. In general, for a synchronous system, the optimum bound that can be
achieved on clock skew when synchronizing N clocks is u(cid:11)1–1(cid:101)N(cid:12) [Lundelius and
Lynch 1984].
Most distributed systems found in practice are asynchronous: the factors leading
to message delays are not bounded in their effect, and there is no upper bound max on
message transmission delays. This is particularly so for the Internet. For an
asynchronous system, we may say only that T = min+x, where x(cid:149) 0. The value
trans
of x is not known in a particular case, although a distribution of values may be
measurable for a particular installation.
14.3.2 Cristian’smethodforsynchronizingclocks
Cristian [1989] suggested the use of a time server, connected to a device that receives
signals from a source of UTC, to synchronize computers externally. Upon request, the
server process S supplies the time according to its clock, as shown in Figure 14.2.
Figure 14.2 Clock synchronization using a time server
mmrr
mmtt
Pp TTimime eS seervrveer,r ,S S


===== page 620 =====
602 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Cristian observed that while there is no upper bound on message transmission delays in
an asynchronous system, the round-trip times for messages exchanged between pairs of
processes are often reasonably short – a small fraction of a second. He describes the
algorithm as probabilistic: the method achieves synchronization only if the observed
round-trip times between client and server are sufficiently short compared with the
required accuracy.
A process p requests the time in a message m , and receives the time value t in a
r
message m (t is inserted in m at the last possible point before transmission from S’s
t t
computer). Process p records the total round-trip time T taken to send the request
round
m and receive the reply m . It can measure this time with reasonable accuracy if its
r t
rate of clock drift is small. For example, the round-trip time should be on the order of
1–10 milliseconds on a LAN, over which time a clock with a drift rate of 10–6
seconds/second varies by at most 10–5 milliseconds.
A simple estimate of the time to which p should set its clock is t+T (cid:101)2,
round
which assumes that the elapsed time is split equally before and after S placed t in m .
t
This is normally a reasonably accurate assumption, unless the two messages are
transmitted over different networks. If the value of the minimum transmission time min
is known or can be conservatively estimated, then we can determine the accuracy of this
result as follows.
The earliest point at which S could have placed the time in m was min after p
t
dispatched m . The latest point at which it could have done this was min before m
r t
arrived at p. The time by S’s clock when the reply message arrives is therefore in the
range [t+min, t+T –min]. The width of this range is T –2min, so the
round round
accuracy is ±(cid:11)T (cid:101)2–min(cid:12).
round
Variability can be dealt with to some extent by making several requests to S
(spacing the requests so that transitory congestion can clear) and taking the minimum
value of T to give the most accurate estimate. The greater the accuracy required,
round
the smaller the probability of achievingit. This is because the most accurate results are
those in which both messages are transmitted in a time close to min – an unlikely event
in a busy network.
DiscussionofCristian’salgorithm • As described, Cristian’s method suffers from the
problem associated with all services implemented by a single server: that the single time
server might fail and thus render synchronization temporarily impossible. Cristian
suggested, for this reason, that time should be provided by a group of synchronized time
servers, each with a receiver for UTC time signals. For example, a client could multicast
its request to all servers and use only the first reply obtained.
Note that a faulty time server that replied with spurious time values, or an imposter
time server that replied with deliberately incorrect times, could wreak havoc in a
computer system. These problems were beyond the scope of the work described by
Cristian [1989], which assumes that sources of external time signals are self-checking.
Cristian and Fetzer [1994] describe a family of probabilistic protocols for internal clock
synchronization, each of which tolerates certain failures. Srikanth and Toueg [1987]
first described an algorithm that is optimal with respect to the accuracy of the
synchronized clocks, while tolerating some failures. Dolev et al. [1986] showed that if
f is the number of faulty clocks out of a total of N, then we must have N(cid:33)3f if the other,
correct, clocks are still to be able to achieve agreement. The problem of dealing with


===== page 621 =====
SECTION 14.3 SYNCHRONIZING PHYSICAL CLOCKS 603
faulty clocks is partially addressed by the Berkeley algorithm, which is described next.
The problem of malicious interference with time synchronization can be dealt with by
authentication techniques.
14.3.3 The Berkeleyalgorithm
Gusella and Zatti [1989] describe an algorithm for internal synchronization that they
developed for collections of computers running Berkeley UNIX. In it, a coordinator
computer is chosen to act as the master. Unlike in Cristian’s protocol, this computer
periodically polls the other computers whose clocks are to be synchronized, called
slaves. The slaves send back their clock values to it. The master estimates their local
clock times by observing the round-trip times (similarly to Cristian’s technique), and it
averages the values obtained (including its own clock’s reading). The balance of
probabilities is that this average cancels out the individual clocks’ tendencies to run fast
or slow. The accuracy of the protocol depends upon a nominal maximum round-trip time
between the master and the slaves. The master eliminates any occasional readings
associated with larger times than this maximum.
Instead of sending the updated current time back to the other computers – which
would introduce further uncertainty due to the message transmission time – the master
sends the amount by which each individual slave’s clock requires adjustment. This can
be a positive or negative value.
The Berkeley algorithm eliminates readings from faulty clocks. Such clocks could
have a significant adverse effect if an ordinary average was taken so instead the master
takes a fault-tolerant average. That is, a subset is chosen of clocks that do not differ from
one another by more than a specified amount, and the average is taken of readings from
only these clocks.
Gusella and Zatti describe an experiment involving 15 computers whose clocks
were synchronized to within about 20–25 milliseconds using their protocol. The local
clocks’ drift rates were measured to be less than 2(cid:117)(cid:3)10–5, and the maximum round-trip
time was taken to be 10 milliseconds.
Should the master fail, then another can be elected to take over and function
exactly as its predecessor. Section 15.3 discusses some general-purpose election
algorithms. Note that these are not guaranteed to elect a new master in bounded time, so
the difference between two clocks would be unbounded if they were used.
14.3.4 The NetworkTime Protocol
Cristian’s method and the Berkeley algorithm are intended primarily for use within
intranets. The Network Time Protocol (NTP) [Mills 1995] defines an architecture for a
time service and a protocol to distribute time information over the Internet.
NTP’s chief design aims and features are as follows:
To provide a service enabling clients across the Internet to be synchronized
accurately to UTC:Although large and variable message delays are encountered in
Internet communication, NTP employs statistical techniques for the filtering of
timing data and it discriminates between the quality of timing data from different
servers.


===== page 622 =====
604 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.3 An example synchronization subnet in an NTP implementation
1
2 2
3 3 3
Arrows denote synchronization control, numbers denote strata.
To provide a reliable service that can survive lengthy losses of connectivity: There
are redundant servers and redundant paths between the servers. The servers can
reconfigure so as to continue to provide the service if one of them becomes
unreachable.
To enable clients to resynchronize sufficiently frequently to offset the rates of drift
found in most computers:The service is designed to scale to large numbers of clients
and servers.
To provide protection against interference with the time service, whether malicious
or accidental:The time service uses authentication techniques to check that timing
data originate from the claimed trusted sources. It also validates the return addresses
of messages sent to it.
The NTP service is provided by a network of servers locatedacross the Internet. Primary
servers are connected directly to a time source such as a radio clock receiving UTC;
secondary servers are synchronized, ultimately, with primary servers. The servers are
connected in a logical hierarchy called a synchronization subnet (see Figure 14.3),
whose levels are called strata. Primary servers occupy stratum 1: they are at the root.
Stratum 2 servers are secondary servers that are synchronized directly with the primary
servers; stratum 3 servers are synchronized with stratum 2 servers, and so on. The
lowest-level (leaf) servers execute in users’ workstations.
The clocks belonging to servers with high stratum numbers are liable to be less
accurate than those with low stratum numbers, because errors are introduced at each
level of synchronization. NTP also takes into account the total message round-trip
delays to the root in assessing the quality of timekeeping data held by a particular server.
The synchronization subnet can reconfigure as servers become unreachable or
failures occur. If, for example, a primary server’s UTC source fails, then it can become


===== page 623 =====
SECTION 14.3 SYNCHRONIZINGPHYSICAL CLOCKS 605
Figure 14.4 Messages exchanged between a pair of NTP peers
Server B Ti–2 Ti–1
Time
m m'
Time
Server A Ti–3 Ti
a stratum 2 secondary server. If a secondary server’s normal source of synchronization
fails or becomes unreachable, then it may synchronize with another server.
NTP servers synchronize with one another in one of three modes: multicast,
procedure-call and symmetric mode. Multicast mode is intended for use on a high-speed
LAN. One or more servers periodically multicasts the time to the servers running in
other computers connected by the LAN, which set their clocks assuming a small delay.
This mode can achieve only relatively low accuracies, but ones that nonetheless are
considered sufficient for many purposes.
Procedure-call mode is similar to the operation of Cristian’s algorithm, described
in Section 14.3.2. In this mode, one server accepts requests from other computers, which
it processes by replying with its timestamp (current clock reading). This mode is suitable
where higher accuracies are required than can be achieved with multicast, or where
multicast is not supported in hardware. For example, file servers on the same or a
neighbouring LAN that need to keep accurate timing information for file accesses could
contact a local server in procedure-call mode.
Finally, symmetric mode is intended for use by the servers that supply time
information in LANs and by the higher levels (lower strata) of the synchronization
subnet, where the highest accuracies are to be achieved. A pair of servers operating in
symmetric mode exchange messages bearing timing information. Timing data are
retained as part of an association between the servers that is maintained in order to
improve the accuracy of their synchronization over time.
In all modes, messages are delivered unreliably, using the standard UDP Internet
transport protocol. In procedure-call mode and symmetric mode, processes exchange
pairs of messages. Each message bears timestamps of recent message events: the local
times when the previous NTP message between the pair was sent and received, and the
local time when the current message was transmitted. The recipient of the NTP message
notes the local time when it receives the message. The four times T , T , T
i–3 i–2 i–1
and T are shown in Figure 14.4 for the messages m and m' sent between servers A and
i
B. Note that in symmetric mode, unlike in Cristian’s algorithm, there can be a non-
negligible delay between the arrival of one message and the dispatch of the next. Also,
messages may be lost, but the three timestamps carried by each message are nonetheless
valid.


===== page 624 =====
606 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
For each pair of messages sent between two servers the NTP calculates an offset
o , which is an estimate of the actual offset between the two clocks, and a delay d ,
i i
which is the total transmission time for the two messages. If the true offset of the clock
atB relative to that at A is o, and if the actual transmission times for m and m' are t and
t', respectively, then we have:
T = T +t+o and T = T +t(cid:99)–o
i–2 i–3 i i–1
This leads to:
d = t+t(cid:99) = T –T +T –T
i i–2 i–3 i i–1
and:
o = o +(cid:11)t(cid:99)–t(cid:12)(cid:101)2,where o = (cid:11)T –T +T –T (cid:12)(cid:101)2
i i i–2 i–3 i–1 i
Using the fact that t(cid:15)t(cid:99)(cid:116)0, it can be shown that o –d (cid:101)2(cid:100)o(cid:100)o +d (cid:101)2. Thus o is
i i i i i
an estimate of the offset, and d is a measure of the accuracy of this estimate.
i
NTP servers apply a data filtering algorithm to successive pairs <o(cid:15)d >, which
i i
estimates the offset o and calculates the quality of this estimate as a statistical quantity
called the filter dispersion. A relatively high filter dispersion represents relatively
unreliable data. The eight most recent pairs <o(cid:15)d > are retained. As with Cristian’s
i i
algorithm, the value of o that corresponds to the minimum value d is chosen to estimate
j j
o.
The value of the offset derived from communication with a single source is not
necessarily used by itself to control the local clock, however. In general, an NTP server
engages in message exchanges with several of its peers. In addition to data filtering
applied to exchanges with each single peer, NTP applies a peer-selection algorithm. This
examines the values obtained from exchanges with each of several peers, looking for
relatively unreliable values. The output from this algorithm may cause a server to
change the peer that it primarily uses for synchronization.
Peers with lower stratum numbers are more favoured than those in higher strata
because they are ‘closer’ to the primary time sources. Also, those with the lowest
synchronization dispersion are relatively favoured. This is the sum of the filter
dispersions measured between the server and the root of the synchronization subnet.
(Peers exchange synchronization dispersions in messages, allowing this total to be
calculated.)
NTP employs a phase lock loop model [Mills 1995], which modifies the local
clock’s update frequency in accordance with observations of its drift rate. To take a
simple example, if a clock is discovered always to gain time at the rate of, say, four
seconds per hour, then its frequency can be reduced slightly (in software or hardware)
to compensate for this. The clock’s drift in the intervals between synchronization is thus
reduced.
Mills quotes synchronization accuracies on the order of tens of milliseconds over
Internet paths, and one millisecond on LANs.


===== page 625 =====
SECTION 14.4 LOGICAL TIME AND LOGICAL CLOCKS 607
Figure 14.5 Events occurring at three processes
p1
a b m1
p2 Physical
c d time
m2
p3
e f
14.4 Logical time and logical clocks
From the point of view of any single process, events are ordered uniquely by times
shown on the local clock. However, as Lamport [1978] pointed out, since we cannot
synchronize clocks perfectly across a distributed system, we cannot in general use
physical time to find out the order of any arbitrary pair of events occurring within it.
In general, we can use a scheme that is similar to physical causality but that applies
in distributed systems to order some of the events that occur at different processes. This
ordering is based on two simple and intuitively obvious points:
(cid:129) If two events occurred at the same process p (cid:11)i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N(cid:12), then they
i
occurred in the order in which p
i
observes them – this is the order (cid:111)i that we
defined above.
(cid:129) Whenevera message is sent between processes, the event of sending the message
occurred before the event of receiving the message.
Lamport called the partial ordering obtained by generalizing these two relationships the
happened-beforerelation. It is also sometimes known as the relation of causal ordering
orpotential causal ordering.
We can define the happened-beforerelation, denoted by (cid:111), as follows:
HB1: If (cid:7)(cid:3)process(cid:3)p
i
:e(cid:111)i e', then e(cid:111)e(cid:99).
HB2: For any message m,send(m)(cid:111)receive(m)(cid:3)
– where send(m)is the event of sending the message, and receive(m)
is the event of receiving it.
HB3: If e, e(cid:99) and e(cid:115) are events such that e(cid:111)e(cid:99) and e(cid:99)(cid:111)e(cid:115), then e(cid:111)e(cid:115).
Thus, if e and e(cid:99) are events, and if e(cid:111)e(cid:99), then we can find a series of events
e (cid:15)e (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)e occurring at one or more processes such that e = e and e(cid:99) = e , and
1 2 n 1 · n
for i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N–1 either HB1 or HB2 applies between e and e . That is, either
i i+1
they occur in succession at the same process, or there is a message m such that e =
i
send(m) and e = receive(m). The sequence of events e (cid:15)e (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)e need not be
i+1 1 2 n
unique.
The relation (cid:111) is illustrated for the case of three processes, p , p and p , in
1 2 3
Figure 14.5. It can be seen that a(cid:111)b, since the events occur in this order at process p
1
(a(cid:111)i b), and similarly c(cid:111)d. Furthermore, b(cid:111)c, since these events are the sending and


===== page 626 =====
608 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
reception of message m , and similarly d(cid:111)f. Combining these relations, we may also
1
say that, for example, a(cid:111)f.
It can also be seen from Figure 14.5 that not all events are related by the relation
(cid:111). For example, a(cid:111)/ e and e(cid:111)/ a, since they occur at different processes, and there is
no chain of messages intervening between them. We say that events such as a and e that
are not ordered by (cid:111) are concurrent and write this a(cid:95)(cid:95)e.
The relation (cid:111) captures a flow of data intervening between two events. Note,
however, that in principle data can flow in ways other than by message passing. For
example, if Smith enters a command to his process to send a message, then telephones
Jones, who commands her process to issue another message, the issuing of the first
message clearly happened-before that of the second. Unfortunately, since no network
messages were sent between the issuing processes, we cannot model this type of
relationship in our system.
Another point to note is that if the happened-before relation holds between two
events, then the first might or might not actually have caused the second. For example,
if a server receives a request message and subsequently sends a reply, then clearly the
reply transmission is caused by the request transmission. However, the relation (cid:111)
captures only potential causality, and two events can be related by (cid:111) even though there
is no real connection between them. A process might, for example, receive a message
and subsequently issue another message, but one that it issues every five minutes
anyway and that bears no specific relation to the first message. No actual causality has
been involved, but the relation (cid:111) would order these events.
Logicalclocks • Lamport [1978] invented a simple mechanism by which the happened-
beforeordering can be captured numerically, called a logical clock. A Lamport logical
clock is a monotonically increasing software counter, whose value need bear no
particular relationship to any physical clock. Each process p keeps its own logical
i
clock, L , which it uses to apply so-called Lamport timestamps to events. We denote the
i
timestamp of event e at p by L (cid:11)e(cid:12), and by L(cid:11)e(cid:12) we denote the timestamp of event e
i i
at whatever process it occurred at.
To capture the happened-beforerelation(cid:111), processes update their logical clocks
and transmit the values of their logical clocks in messages as follows:
LC1: L is incremented before each event is issued at process p :
i i
L := L +1.
i i
LC2: (a) When a process p sends a message m, it piggybacks on m the value
i
t = L .
i
(b) On receiving (m,t), a process p computes L := max(cid:11)L(cid:15)t(cid:12) and then
j j j
applies LC1 before timestamping the event receive(m).
Although we increment clocks by 1, we could have chosen any positive value. It can
easily be shown, by induction on the length of any sequence of events relating two
events e and e(cid:99), that e(cid:111)e(cid:99)(cid:159)L(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)L(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12).
Note that the converse is not true. If L(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)L(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12), then we cannot infer that
e(cid:111)e(cid:99). In Figure 14.6 we illustrate the use of logical clocks for the example given in
Figure 14.5. Each of the processes p , p and p has its logical clock initialized to 0.
1 2 3
The clock values given are those immediately after the event to which they are adjacent.
Note that, for example, L(cid:11)b(cid:12)(cid:33)L(cid:11)e(cid:12) but b(cid:95)(cid:95)e.


===== page 627 =====
SECTION 14.4 LOGICAL TIME AND LOGICAL CLOCKS 609
Figure 14.6 Lamport timestamps for the events shown in Figure 14.5
1 2
p1
a b m1
3 4
Physical
p2
time
c d
m2
1 5
p3
e f
Totallyorderedlogicalclocks • Some pairs of distinct events, generated by different
processes, have numerically identical Lamport timestamps. However, we can create a
total order on the set of events – that is, one for which all pairs of distinct events are
ordered – by taking into account the identifiers of the processes at which events occur.
If e is an event occurring at p with local timestamp T , and e(cid:99) is an event occurring at
i i
p with local timestamp T , we define the global logical timestamps for these events to
j j
be (cid:11)T(cid:15)i(cid:12) and (cid:11)T(cid:15)j(cid:12), respectively. And we define (cid:11)T(cid:15)i(cid:12)(cid:31)(cid:11)T(cid:15)j(cid:12) if and only if either
i j i j
T (cid:31)T , or T = T and i(cid:31)j. This ordering has no general physical significance
i j i j
(because process identifiers are arbitrary), but it is sometimes useful. Lamport used it,
for example, to order the entry of processes to a critical section.
Vectorclocks • Mattern [1989] and Fidge [1991] developed vector clocks to overcome
the shortcoming of Lamport’s clocks: the fact that from L(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)L(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12) we cannot
·
conclude that e(cid:111)e(cid:99). A vector clock for a system of N processes is an array of N
integers. Each process keeps its own vector clock, V , which it uses to timestamp local
i
events. Like Lamport timestamps, processes piggyback vector timestamps on the
messagesthey send to one another, and there are simple rules for updating the clocks:
VC1: Initially, V (cid:62)j(cid:64) = 0, for i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N.
i
VC2: Just before p timestamps an event, it sets V (cid:62)i(cid:64):=V (cid:62)i(cid:64)+1.
i i i
VC3: p includes the value t = V in every message it sends.
i i
VC4: When p receives a timestamp t in a message, it sets
i
V (cid:62)j(cid:64):= max(cid:11)V (cid:62)j(cid:64)(cid:15)t(cid:62)j(cid:64)(cid:12) , for j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N. Taking the component-
i i
wise maximum of two vector timestamps in this way is known as a merge
operation.
For a vector clock V , V (cid:62)i(cid:64) is the number of events that p has timestamped, and
i i i
V (cid:62)j(cid:64) (cid:11)j(cid:122)i(cid:12) is the number of events that have occurred at p that have potentially
i j
affected p . (Process p may have timestamped more events by this point, but no
i j
information has flowed to p about them in messages as yet.)
i


===== page 628 =====
610 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.7 Vector timestamps for the events shown in Figure 14.5
(1,0,0) (2,0,0)
p1
a b m1
(2,1,0) (2,2,0)
Physical
p2
time
c d
m2
(0,0,1) (2,2,2)
p3
e f
We may compare vector timestamps as follows:
V = V(cid:99) iff V(cid:62)j(cid:64) = V(cid:99)(cid:62)j(cid:64) for j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N
V(cid:100)V(cid:99) iff V(cid:62)j(cid:64)(cid:100)V(cid:99)(cid:62)j(cid:64) for j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N
V(cid:31)V(cid:99) iff V(cid:100)V(cid:99)(cid:154)V(cid:122)V(cid:99)
Let V(cid:11)e(cid:12) be the vector timestamp applied by the process at which e occurs. It is
straightforward to show, by induction on the length of any sequence of events relating
two events e and e(cid:99), that e(cid:111)e(cid:99)(cid:159)V(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)V(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12). Exercise 10.13 leads the reader to
show the converse: if V(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)V(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12), then e(cid:111)e(cid:99).
Figure 14.7 shows the vector timestamps of the events of Figure 14.5. It can be
seen, for example, that V(cid:11)a(cid:12)(cid:31)V(cid:11)f(cid:12), which reflects the fact that a(cid:111)f. Similarly, we
can tell when two events are concurrent by comparing their timestamps. For example,
that c(cid:95)(cid:95)e can be seen from the facts that neither V(cid:11)c(cid:12)(cid:100)V(cid:11)e(cid:12) nor V(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:100)V(cid:11)c(cid:12).
Vector timestamps have the disadvantage, compared with Lamport timestamps, of
taking up an amount of storage and message payload that is proportional to N, the
number of processes. Charron-Bost [1991] showed that, if we are to be able to tell
whether or not two events are concurrent by inspecting their timestamps, then the
dimension N is unavoidable. However, techniques exist for storing and transmitting
smaller amounts of data, at the expense of the processing required to reconstruct
complete vectors. Raynal and Singhal [1996] give an account of some of these
techniques. They also describe the notion of matrix clocks, whereby processes keep
estimates of other processes’ vector times as well as their own.
14.5 Global states
In this and the next section we examine the problem of finding out whether a particular
property is true of a distributed system as it executes. We begin by giving the examples
of distributed garbage collection, deadlock detection, termination detection and
debugging:


===== page 629 =====
SECTION 14.5 GLOBAL STATES 611
Figure 14.8 Detecting global properties
p1 p2
object
reference
message
(a) Garbage collection garbage object
p1 wait-for p2
(b) Deadlock wait-for
p1 p2
activate
(c) Termination passive passive
Distributed garbage collection: An object is considered to begarbage if there are no
longer any references to it anywhere in the distributed system. The memory taken up
by that object can be reclaimed once it is known to be garbage. To check that an
object is garbage, we must verify that there are no references to it anywhere in the
system. In Figure 14.8(a), process p has two objects that both have references – one
1
has a reference within p itself, and p has a reference to the other. Process p has
1 2 2
one garbage object, with no references to it anywhere in the system. It also has an
object for which neither p nor p has a reference, but there is a reference to it in a
1 2
message that is in transit between the processes. This shows that when we consider
properties of a system, we must include the state of communication channels as well
as the state of the processes.
Distributed deadlock detection: A distributed deadlock occurs when each of a
collection of processes waits for another process to send it a message, and where
there is a cycle in the graph of this ‘waits-for’ relationship. Figure 14.8(b) shows that
processes p and p are each waiting for a message from the other, so this system
1 2
will never make progress.
Distributed termination detection: The problem here is how to detect that a
distributed algorithm has terminated. Detecting termination is a problem that sounds
deceptively easy to solve: it seems at first only necessary to test whether each process
has halted. To see that this is not so, consider a distributed algorithm executed by two
processes p and p , each of which may request values from the other.
1 2
Instantaneously, we may find that a process is either active or passive – a passive
process is not engaged in any activity of its own but is prepared to respond with a
value requested by the other. Suppose we discover that p is passive and that p is
1 2


===== page 630 =====
612 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
passive (Figure 14.8c). To see that we may not conclude that the algorithm has
terminated, consider the following scenario: when we tested p for passivity, a
1
message was on its way from p , which became passive immediately after sending
2
it. On receipt of the message, p became active again – after we had found it to be
1
passive. The algorithm had not terminated.
The phenomena of termination and deadlock are similar in some ways, but they
are different problems. First, a deadlock may affect only a subset of the processes in
a system, whereas all processes must have terminated. Second, process passivity is
not the same as waiting in a deadlock cycle: a deadlocked process is attempting to
perform a further action, for which another process waits; a passive process is not
engaged in any activity.
Distributed debugging: Distributed systems are complex to debug [Bonnaire et al.
1995], and care needs to be taken in establishing what occurred during the execution.
For example, suppose Smith has written an application in which each process p
i
contains a variable x (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N). The variables change as the program
i
executes, but they are required always to be within a value (cid:71) of one another.
Unfortunately, there is a bug in the program, and Smith suspects that under certain
circumstances x –x (cid:33)(cid:71) for some i and j, breaking her consistency constraints. Her
i j
problem is that this relationship must be evaluated for values of the variables that
occur at the same time.
Each of the problems above has specific solutions tailored to it; but they all illustrate the
need to observe a global state, and so motivate a general approach.
14.5.1 Global statesandconsistent cuts
It is possible in principle to observe the succession of states of an individual process, but
the question of how to ascertain a global state of the system – the state of the collection
of processes – is much harder to address.
The essential problem is the absence of global time. If all processes had perfectly
synchronized clocks, then we could agree on a time at which each process would record
its state – the result would be an actual global state of the system. From the collection of
process states we could tell, for example, whether the processes were deadlocked. But
we cannot achieve perfect clock synchronization, so this method is not available to us.
So we might ask whether we can assemble a meaningful global state from local
states recorded at different real times. The answer is a qualified ‘yes’, but in order to see
this we must first introduce some definitions.
Let us return to our general system (cid:132) of N processes p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N), whose
i
execution we wish to study. We said above that a series of events occurs at each process,
and that we may characterize the execution of each process by its history:
0 1 2
history(p (cid:12) = h = <e (cid:15)e (cid:15)e (cid:15)(cid:125)>
i i i i i
Similarly, we may consider any finite prefix of the process’s history:
k 0 1 k
h = <e (cid:15)e (cid:15)(cid:125)e >
i i i i


===== page 631 =====
SECTION 14.5 GLOBAL STATES 613
Figure 14.9 Cuts
e0 e1 e2 e3
1 1 1 1
p1
m1 m2
Physical
p2
time
e0 e1 e2
2 2 2
Inconsistent cut
Consistent cut
Each event either is an internal action of the process (for example, the updating of one
of its variables), or is the sending or receipt of a message over the communication
channels that connect the processes.
In principle, we can record what occurred in (cid:132)’s execution. Each process can
record the events that take place there, and the succession of states it passes through. We
denote by sk the state of process p immediately before the kth event occurs, so that s0
i i i
is the initial state of p . We noted in the examples above that the state of the
i
communication channels is sometimes relevant. Rather than introducing a new type of
state, we make the processes record the sending or receipt of all messages as part of their
state. If we find that process p has recorded that it sent a message m to process
i
p (cid:11)i(cid:122)j(cid:12), then by examining whether p has received that message we can infer whether
j j
or not m is part of the state of the channel between p and p .
i j
We can also form the global history of (cid:132)(cid:3)as the union of the individual process
histories:
H = h (cid:137)h (cid:137)(cid:125)(cid:137)h
0 1 N–1
Mathematically, we can take any set of states of the individual processes to form a global
state S = (cid:11)s (cid:15)s (cid:15)(cid:125)s (cid:12). But which global states are meaningful – that is, which
1 2 N
process states could have occurred at the same time? A global state corresponds to initial
prefixes of the individual process histories. A cut of the system’s execution is a subset
of its global history that is a union of prefixes of process histories:
c c c
C = h 1(cid:137)h 2(cid:137)(cid:125)(cid:137)h N
1 2 N
The state s in the global state S corresponding to the cut C is that of p immediately
i c i
after the last event processed by p in the cut – e i (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N). The set of events
c i i
{e i:i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N} is called the frontier of the cut.
i
Consider the events occurring at processes p and p shown in Figure 14.9. The
1 2
figure shows two cuts, one with frontier <e0 (cid:15)e0> and another with frontier <e2 (cid:15)e2>.
1 2 1 2
The leftmost cut is inconsistent. This is because at p it includes the receipt of the
2
message m , but at p it does not include the sending of that message. This is showing
1 1
an ‘effect’ without a ‘cause’. The actual execution never was in a global state
corresponding to the process states at that frontier, and we can in principle tell this by
examining the (cid:111)(cid:3)relation between events. By contrast, the rightmost cut is consistent.


===== page 632 =====
614 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
It includes both the sending and the receipt of message m and the sending but not the
1
receipt of message m . That is consistent with the actual execution – after all, the
2
message took some time to arrive.
A cut C is consistent if, for each event it contains, it also contains all the events
that happened-before that event:
For all events e(cid:143)C, f(cid:111)e(cid:159)f(cid:143)C
A consistent global state is one that corresponds to a consistent cut. We may
characterize the execution of a distributed system as a series of transitions between
global states of the system:
S (cid:111)S (cid:111)S (cid:111)(cid:125)
0 1 2
In each transition, precisely one event occurs at some single process in the system. This
event is either the sending of a message, the receipt of a message or an internal event. If
two events happened simultaneously, we may nonetheless deem them to have occurred
in a definite order – say, ordered according to process identifiers. (Events that occur
simultaneously must be concurrent: neither happened-before the other.) A system
evolves in this way through consistent global states.
Arun is a total ordering of all the events in a global history that is consistent with
each local history’s ordering, (cid:135) (cid:11)i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N(cid:12). A linearization or consistent run is
i
an ordering of the events in a global history that is consistent with this happened-before
relation (cid:111)(cid:3) on H. Note that a linearization is also a run.
Not all runs pass through consistent global states, but all linearizations pass only
through consistent global states. We say that a state S(cid:99) is reachable from a state S if
there is a linearization that passes through S and then S(cid:99).
Sometimes we may alter the ordering of concurrent events within a linearization,
and derive a run that still passes through only consistent global states. For example, if
two successive events in a linearization are the receipt of messages by two processes,
then we may swap the order of these two events.
14.5.2 Global statepredicates,stability, safetyandliveness
Detecting a condition such as deadlock or termination amounts to evaluating a global
state predicate. A global state predicate is a function that maps from the set of global
states of processes in the system (cid:132)(cid:3)to {True,False}. One of the useful characteristics
of the predicates associated with the state of an object being garbage, of the system being
deadlocked or the system being terminated is that they are all stable: once the system
enters a state in which the predicate is True, it remains True in all future states reachable
from that state. By contrast, when we monitor or debug an application we are often
interested in non-stable predicates, such as that in our example of variables whose
difference is supposed to be bounded. Even if the application reaches a state in which
the bound obtains, it need not stay in that state.
We also note here two further notions relevant to global state predicates: safety
and liveness. Suppose there is an undesirable property (cid:68) that is a predicate of the
system’s global state – for example, (cid:68) could be the property of being deadlocked. Let


===== page 633 =====
SECTION 14.5 GLOBAL STATES 615
S be the original state of the system. Safety with respect to (cid:68) is the assertion that (cid:68)
0
evaluates to False for all states S reachable from S . Conversely, let (cid:69) be a desirable
0
property of a system’s global state – for example,the property of reaching termination.
Liveness with respect to (cid:69) is the property that, for any linearization L starting in the state
S , (cid:69) evaluates to True for some state S reachable from S .
0 L 0
14.5.3 The ‘snapshot’ algorithm of Chandy and Lamport
Chandy and Lamport [1985] describe a ‘snapshot’ algorithm for determining global
states of distributed systems, which we now present. The goal of the algorithm is to
record a set of process and channel states (a ‘snapshot’) for a set of processes p
i
(i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N) such that, even though the combination of recorded states may never
have occurred at the same time, the recorded global state is consistent.
We shall see that the state that the snapshot algorithm records has convenient
properties for evaluating stable global predicates.
The algorithm records state locally at processes; it does not give a method for
gathering the global state at one site. An obvious method for gathering the state is for all
processes to send the state they recorded to a designated collector process, but we shall
not address this issue further here.
The algorithm assumes that:
(cid:129) Neither channels nor processes fail – communication is reliable so that every
message sent is eventually received intact, exactly once.
(cid:129) Channels are unidirectional and provide FIFO-ordered message delivery.
(cid:129) The graph of processes and channels is strongly connected (there is a path between
any two processes).
(cid:129) Any process may initiate a global snapshot at any time.
(cid:129) The processes may continue their execution and send and receive normal
messages while the snapshot takes place.
For each process p , let the incoming channels be those at p over which other processes
i i
send it messages; similarly, the outgoing channels of p are those on which it sends
i
messages to other processes. The essential idea of the algorithm is as follows. Each
process records its state and also, for each incoming channel, a set of messages sent to
it. The process records, for each channel, any messages that arrived after it recorded its
state and before the sender recorded its own state. This arrangement allows us to record
the states of processes at different times but to account for the differentials between
process states in terms of messages transmitted but not yet received. If process p has
i
sent a message m to process p , but p has not received it, then we account for m as
j j
belonging to the state of the channel between them.
The algorithm proceeds through use of special marker messages, which are
distinct from any other messages the processes send and which the processes may send
and receive while they proceed with their normal execution. The marker has a dual role:
as a prompt for the receiver to save its own state, if it has not already done so; and as a
means of determining which messages to include in the channel state.


===== page 634 =====
616 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.10 Chandy and Lamport’s ‘snapshot’ algorithm
Marker receiving rule for process p
i
On receipt of a marker message at p over channel c:
i
if (p has not yet recorded its state) it
i
records its process state now;
records the state of c as the empty set;
turns on recording of messages arriving over other incoming channels;
else
p records the state of c as the set of messages it has received over c(cid:3)
i
since it saved its state.
end if
Marker sending rule for process p
i
After p has recorded its state, for each outgoing channel c:
i
p sends one marker message over c
i
(before it sends any other message over c).
The algorithm is defined through two rules, the marker receiving rule and the
marker sending rule (Figure 14.10). The marker sending rule obligates processes to send
a marker after they have recorded their state, but before they send any other messages.
The marker receiving rule obligates a process that has not recorded its state to do
so. In that case, this is the first marker that it has received. It notes which messages
subsequently arrive on the other incoming channels. When a process that has already
saved its state receives a marker (on another channel), it records the state of that channel
as the set of messages it has received on it since it saved its state.
Any process may begin the algorithm at any time. It acts as though it has received
a marker (over a nonexistent channel) and follows the marker receiving rule. Thus it
records its state and begins to record messages arriving over all its incoming channels.
Several processes may initiate recording concurrently in this way (as long as the markers
they use can be distinguished).
We illustrate the algorithm for a system of two processes, p and p , connected
1 2
by two unidirectional channels, c and c . The two processes trade in ‘widgets’.
1 2
Process p sends orders for widgets over c to p , enclosing payment at the rate of $10
1 2 2
per widget. Some time later, process p sends widgets along channel c to p . The
2 1 1
Figure 14.11 Two processes and their initial states
p1 c2 p2
c1
$1000 (none) $50 2000
account widgets account widgets


===== page 635 =====
SECTION 14.5 GLOBAL STATES 617
Figure 14.12 The execution of the processes in Figure 14.11
1. Global state S0
<$1000, 0> p1 c2 (empty) p2 <$50, 2000>
c1 (empty)
2. Global state S1
<$900, 0> p1 c2 (Order 10, $100), M p2 <$50, 2000>
c1 (empty)
3. Global state S2
<$900, 0> p1 c2 (Order 10, $100), M p2 <$50, 1995>
c1 (five widgets)
4. Global state S3
<$900, 5> p1 c2 (Order 10, $100) p2 <$50, 1995>
c1 (empty)
(M = marker message)
processes have the initial states shown in Figure 14.11. Process p has already received
2
an order for five widgets, which it will shortly dispatch to p .
1
Figure 14.12 shows an execution of the system while the state is recorded. Process
p records its state in the actual global state S , when the state of p is <$1000, 0>.
1 0 1
Following the marker sending rule, process p then emits a marker message over its
1
outgoing channel c before it sends the next application-level message: (Order 10,
2
$100), over channel c . The system enters actual global state S .
2 1
Before p receives the marker, it emits an application message (five widgets) over
2
c in response to p ’s previous order, yielding a new actual global state S .
1 1 2
Now process p receives p ’s message (five widgets), and p receives the
1 2 2
marker. Following the marker receiving rule, p records its state as <$50, 1995> and
2
that of channel c as the empty sequence. Following the marker sending rule, it sends a
2
marker message over c .
1
When process p receives p ’s marker message, it records the state of channel
1 2
c as the single message (five widgets) that it received after it first recorded its state.
1
The final actual global state is S .
3
The final recorded state is p : <$1000, 0>; p : <$50, 1995>; c : <(five
1 2 1
widgets)>; c : <>. Note that this state differs from all the global states through which
2
the system actually passed.
Terminationofthesnapshotalgorithm • We assume that a process that has received a
marker message records its state within a finite time and sends marker messages over
each outgoing channel within a finite time (even when it no longer needs to send
application messages over these channels). If there is a path of communication channels
and processes from a process p to a process p (cid:11)j(cid:122)i(cid:12), then it is clear on these
i j
assumptions that p will record its state a finite time after p recorded its state. Since
j i
we are assuming the graph of processes and channels to be strongly connected, it follows


===== page 636 =====
618 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.13 Reachability between states in the snapshot algorithm
actual execution e0,e1,...
Sinit
b
re
e
c
g
o
in
rd
s
ing r
e
e
n
c
d
o
s
rding Sfinal
Ssnap
pre-snap: e' 0,e' 1,...e' R-1 post-snap: e' R,e' R+1,...
that all processes will have recorded their states and the states of incoming channels a
finite time after some process initially records its state.
Characterizingtheobservedstate • The snapshot algorithm selects a cut from the history
of the execution. The cut, and therefore the state recorded by this algorithm, is
consistent. To see this, let e and e be events occurring at p and p , respectively, such
i j i j
that e (cid:111)e . We assert that if e is in the cut, then e is in the cut. That is, if e occurred
i j j i j
before p recorded its state, then e must have occurred before p recorded its state.
j i i
This is obvious if the two processes are the same, so we shall assume that j(cid:122)i. Assume,
for the moment, the opposite of what we wish to prove: that p recorded its state before
i
e occurred. Consider the sequence of H messages m (cid:15)m (cid:125)(cid:15)m (H(cid:116)1), giving rise
i 1 2 H
to the relation e (cid:111)e . By FIFO ordering over the channels that these messages
i j
traverse, and by the marker sending and receiving rules, a marker message would have
reached p ahead of each of m (cid:15)m (cid:125)(cid:15)m . By the marker receiving rule, p would
j 1 2 H j
therefore have recorded its state before the event e . This contradicts our assumption
j
that e is in the cut, and we are done.
j
We may further establish a reachability relation between the observed global state
and the initial and final global states when the algorithm runs. Let Sys = e (cid:15)e (cid:15)(cid:125) be
0 1
the linearization of the systemas it executed (where two events occurred at exactly the
same time, we order them according to process identifiers). Let S be the global state
init
immediately before the first process recorded its state; let S be the global state when
final
the snapshot algorithm terminates, immediately after the last state-recording action; and
let S be the recorded global state.
snap
We shall find a permutation of Sys, Sys(cid:99) = e(cid:99)(cid:15)e(cid:99)(cid:15)e(cid:99)(cid:15)(cid:125) such that all three states
0 1 2
S , S and S occur in Sys(cid:99), S is reachable from S in Sys(cid:99), and S
init snap final snap init final
is reachable from S in Sys(cid:99).Figure 14.13 shows this situation, in which the upper
snap
linearization is Sys and the lower linearization is Sys(cid:99).
We derive Sys(cid:99) from Sys by first categorizing all events in Sys as pre-snap
events or post-snap events. A pre-snap event at process p is one that occurred at p
i i
before it recorded its state; all other events are post-snap events. It is important to
understand that a post-snap event may occur before a pre-snap event in Sys, if the events
occur at different processes. (Of course, no post-snap event may occur before a pre-snap
event at the same process.)
We shall show how we may order all pre-snap events before post-snap events to
obtain Sys(cid:99). Suppose that e is a post-snap event at one process, and e is a pre-snap
j j+1


===== page 637 =====
SECTION 14.6 DISTRIBUTED DEBUGGING 619
event at a different process. It cannot be that e (cid:111)e for then these two events would
j j+1
be the sending and receiving of a message, respectively. A marker message would have
to have preceded the message, making the reception of the message a post-snap event,
but by assumption e is a pre-snap event. We may therefore swap the two events
j+1
without violating the happened-beforerelation (that is, the resultant sequence of events
remains a linearization). The swap does not introduce new process states, since we do
not alter the order in which events occur at any individual process.
We continue swapping pairs of adjacent events in this way as necessary until we
have ordered all pre-snap events e(cid:99)(cid:15)e(cid:99)(cid:15)e(cid:99)(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)e(cid:99) prior to all post-snap events
0 1 2 R–1
e(cid:99) (cid:15)e(cid:99) (cid:15)e(cid:99) (cid:15)(cid:125) with Sys(cid:99) the resulting execution. For each process, the set of
R R+1 R+2
events in e(cid:99)(cid:15)e(cid:99)(cid:15)e(cid:99)(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)e(cid:99) that occurred at it is exactly the set of events that it
0 1 2 R–1
experienced before it recorded its state. Therefore the state of each process at that point,
and the state of the communication channels, is that of the global state S recorded
snap
by the algorithm. We have disturbed neither of the states S or S with which the
init final
linearization begins and ends. So we have established the reachability relationship.
Stabilityandthereachabilityoftheobservedstate • The reachability property of the
snapshot algorithm is useful for detecting stable predicates. In general, any non-stable
predicate we establish as being True in the state S may or may not have been True
snap
in the actual execution whose global state we recorded. However, if a stable predicate is
True in the state S then we may conclude that the predicate is True in the state S ,
snap final
since by definition a stable predicate that is True of a state S is also True of any state
reachable from S. Similarly, if the predicate evaluates to False for S , then it must
snap
also be False for S .
init
14.6 Distributed debugging
We now examine the problem of recording a system’s global state so that we may make
useful statements about whether a transitory state – as opposed to a stable state –
occurred in an actual execution. This is what we require, in general, when debugging a
distributed system. We gave an example above in which each of a set of processes p
i
has a variable x . The safety condition required in this example is x –x (cid:100)(cid:71)
i i j
(i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N); this constraint is to be met even though a process may change the
value of its variable at any time. Another example is a distributed system controlling a
system of pipes in a factory where we are interested in whether all the valves (controlled
by different processes) were open at some time. In these examples, we cannot in general
observe the values of the variables or the states of the valves simultaneously. The
challenge is to monitor the system’s execution over time – to capture ‘trace’ information
rather than a single snapshot – so that we can establish post hoc whether the required
safety condition was or may have been violated.
Chandy and Lamport’s [1985] snapshot algorithm collects state in a distributed
fashion, and we pointed out how the processes in the system could send the state they
gather to a monitor process for collection. The algorithm we describe next (due to
Marzullo and Neiger [1991]) is centralized. The observed processes send their states to
a process called a monitor, which assembles globally consistent states from what it
receives. We consider the monitor to lie outside the system, observing its execution.


===== page 638 =====
620 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Our aim is to determine cases where a given global state predicate (cid:73) was definitely
True at some point in the execution we observed, and cases where it was possibly True.
The notion ‘possibly’ arises as a natural concept because we may extract a consistent
global state S from an executing system and find that (cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12) is True. No single
observation of a consistent global state allows us to conclude whether a non-stable
predicate ever evaluated to True in the actual execution. Nevertheless, we may be
interested to know whether they might have occurred, as far as we can tell by observing
the execution.
The notion ‘definitely’ does apply to the actualexecution and not to a run that we
have extrapolated from it. It may sound paradoxical for us to consider what happened in
an actual execution. However, it is possible to evaluate whether (cid:73)(cid:3)was definitely True
by considering all linearizations of the observed events.
We now define the notions of possibly(cid:73) and definitely (cid:73) for a predicate (cid:73) in terms
of linearizations of H, the history of the system’s execution:
possibly(cid:73)(cid:29) The statementpossibly(cid:73) means that there is a consistent global state S
through which a linearization of H passes such that (cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12) is True.
definitely (cid:73):The statement definitely (cid:73) means that for all linearizations L of H,
there is a consistent global state S through which L passes such that (cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12) is True.
When we use Chandy and Lamport’s snapshot algorithm and obtain the global state
S , we may assert possibly (cid:73) if (cid:73)(cid:11)S (cid:12) happens to be True. But in general
snap snap
evaluatingpossibly (cid:73) entails a search through all consistent global states derived from
the observed execution. Only if (cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12) evaluates to False for all consistent global states
Sis it not the case that possibly (cid:73). Note also that while we may conclude definitely (cid:11)(cid:153)(cid:73)(cid:12)
from (cid:153)possibly (cid:73), we may not conclude (cid:153)possibly (cid:73) from definitely (cid:11)(cid:153)(cid:73)(cid:12). The latter
is the assertion that (cid:153)(cid:73) holds at some state on every linearization: (cid:73)(cid:3)may hold for other
states.
We now describe: how the process states arecollected; how the monitor extracts
consistent global states; and how the monitor evaluates possibly (cid:73) and definitely (cid:73) in
both asynchronous and synchronous systems.
14.6.1 Collectingthe state
The observed processes p (cid:11)i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N(cid:12) send their initial state to the monitor
i
initially, and thereafter from time to time, in state messages. The monitor records the
state messages from each process p in a separate queue Q , for each i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N.
i i
The activity of preparing and sending state messages may delay the normal
execution of the observed processes, but it does not otherwise interfere with it. There is
no need to send the state except initially and when it changes. There are two
optimizations to reduce the state-message traffic to the monitor. First, the global state
predicate may depend only on certain parts of the processes’ states – for example, only
on the states of particular variables – so the observed processes need only send the
relevant state to the monitor. Second, they need only send their state at times when the
predicate(cid:73)(cid:3)may become True or cease to be True. There is no point in sending changes
to the state that do not affect the predicate’s value.


===== page 639 =====
SECTION 14.6 DISTRIBUTED DEBUGGING 621
Figure 14.14 Vector timestamps and variable values for the execution of Figure 14.9
(1,0) (2,0) (3,0) (4,3)
x1= 1 x1= 100 x1= 105 x1= 90
p1
m1 m2
Physical
p2
time
x2= 100 x2= 95 x2= 90
(2,1) (2,2) (2,3) Cut C2
CutC1
For example, in the example system of processes p that are supposed to obey the
i
constraint x –x (cid:100)(cid:71). (i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N), each process need only notify the monitor
i j
when the values of its own variable x changes. When they send their state, they supply
i
the value of x but do not need to send any other variables.
i
14.6.2 Observingconsistent globalstates
The monitor must assemble consistent global states against which it evaluates (cid:73). Recall
that a cut C is consistent if and only if for all events e in the cut C, f(cid:111)e(cid:159)f(cid:143)C .
For example, Figure 14.14 shows two processes p and p with variables x and
1 2 1
x , respectively. The events shown on the timelines (with vector timestamps) are
2
adjustments to the values of the two variables. Initially, x = x = 0. The requirement
1 2
is x –x (cid:100)50. The processes make adjustments to their variables, but ‘large’
1 2
adjustments cause a message containing the new value to be sent to the other process.
When either of the processes receives an adjustment message from the other, it sets its
variable equal to the value contained in the message.
Whenever one of the processes p or p adjusts the value of its variable (whether
1 2
it is a ‘small’ adjustment or a ‘large’ one), it sends the value in a state message to the
monitor. The latter keeps the state messages in the per-process queues for analysis. If the
monitor were to use values from the inconsistent cut C in Figure 14.14, then it would
1
find that x = 1(cid:15)x = 100, breaking the constraint x –x (cid:100)50. But this state of
1 2 1 2
affairs never occurred. On the other hand, values from the consistent cut C show
2
x = 105(cid:15)x = 90.
1 2
In order that the monitor can distinguish consistent global states from inconsistent
global states, the observed processes enclose their vector clock values with their state
messages. Each queue Q is kept in sending order, which can immediately be
i
established by examining the ith component of the vector timestamps. Of course, the
monitor may deduce nothing about the ordering of states sent by different processes
from their arrival order, because of variable message latencies. It must instead examine
the vector timestamps of the state messages.
Let S = (cid:11)s (cid:15)s (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s (cid:12) be a global state drawn from the state messages that the
1 2 N
monitor has received. Let V(cid:11)s (cid:12)be the vector timestamp of the state s received from
i i
p . Then it can be shown that S is a consistent global state if and only if:
i


===== page 640 =====
622 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.15 The lattice of global states for the execution of Figure 14.14
Level 0 S00
1 S10
2 S20
Sij= global state after i events at process 1
and jevents at process 2
3 S30 S21
4 S31 S22
5 S32 S23
6 S33
7 S43
V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)i(cid:64)(cid:116)V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)i(cid:64) for i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N – (Condition CGS)
i j
This says that the number of p ’s events known at p when it sent s is no more than
i j j
the number of events that had occurred at p when it sent s . In other words, if one
i i
process’s state depends upon another (according to happened-beforeordering), then the
global state also encompasses the state upon which it depends.
In summary, we now possess a method whereby the monitor may establish
whether a given global state is consistent, using the vector timestamps kept by the
observed processes and piggybacked on the state messages that they send to it.
Figure 14.15 shows the lattice of consistent global states corresponding to the
execution of the two processes in Figure 14.14. This structure captures the relation of
reachability between consistent global states. The nodes denote global states, and the
edges denote possible transitions between these states. The global state S has both
00
processes in their initial state; S has p still in its initial state and p in the next state
10 2 1
in its local history. The state S is not consistent, because of the message m sent from
01 1
p to p , so it does not appear in the lattice.
1 2
The lattice is arranged in levels with, for example, S in level 0 and S in level
00 10
1. In general, S is in level (cid:11)i+j(cid:12). A linearization traverses the lattice from any global
ij
state to any global state reachable from it on the next level – that is, in each step some
process experiences one event. For example, S is reachable from S , but S is not
22 20 22
reachable from S .
30
The lattice shows us all the linearizations corresponding to a history. It is now
clear in principle how a monitor should evaluate possibly (cid:73) and definitely (cid:73). To evaluate
possibly (cid:73), the monitor starts at the initial state and steps through all consistent states
reachable from that point, evaluating (cid:73) at each stage. It stops when (cid:73) evaluates to True.
To evaluate definitely (cid:73), the monitor must attempt to find a set of states through which
all linearizations must pass, and at each of which (cid:73) evaluates to True. For example, if
(cid:73)(cid:11)S (cid:12) and (cid:73)(cid:11)S (cid:12) in Figure 14.15 are both True then, since all linearizations pass
30 21
through these states, definitely (cid:73) holds.


===== page 641 =====
SECTION 14.6 DISTRIBUTED DEBUGGING 623
Figure 14.16 Algorithms to evaluate possibly (cid:73)(cid:3)anddefinitely (cid:73)
1.Evaluating possibly (cid:73) for global history H of N processes
L := 0;
States := { (cid:11)s0 (cid:15)s0 (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s0 (cid:12)};
1 2 N
while ((cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12) = False for all S(cid:143)States)
L := L + 1;
Reachable := {S(cid:99): S(cid:99) reachable in H from some S(cid:143)States (cid:154) level(cid:11)S(cid:99)(cid:12) = L};
States := Reachable
end while
output "possibly (cid:73)";
2.Evaluating definitely (cid:73) for global history H of N processes
L := 0;
if ((cid:73)(cid:11)s0 (cid:15)s0 (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s0 (cid:12))thenStates := {} elseStates := { (cid:11)s0 (cid:15)s0 (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s0 (cid:12)};
1 2 N 1 2 N
while (States(cid:143) {})
L := L + 1;
Reachable := {S(cid:99): S(cid:99) reachable in H from some S(cid:143)States (cid:154) level(cid:11)S'(cid:12) = L};
States := {S(cid:143)Reachable: (cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12) = False}
end while
output "definitely(cid:73)";
14.6.3 Evaluatingpossibly (cid:73)
To evaluate possibly (cid:73), the monitor must traverse the lattice of reachable states, starting
from the initial state (cid:11)s0 (cid:15)s0 (cid:125)s0 (cid:12). The algorithm is shown in Figure 14.16. The
1 2 N
algorithm assumes that the execution is infinite. It may easily be adapted for a finite
execution.
The monitor may discover the set of consistent states in level L+1 reachable
from a given consistent state in level L by the following method. Let
S = (cid:11)s (cid:15)s (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s (cid:12) be a consistent state. Then a consistent state in the next level
1 2 N
reachable from S is of the form S(cid:99) = (cid:11)s (cid:15)s (cid:15)(cid:125)s(cid:99)(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s (cid:12), which differs from S only by
1 2 i N
containing the next state (after asingle event) of some process p . The monitor can find
i
all such states by traversing the queues of state messages Q (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N). The
i
state S(cid:99) is reachable from S if and only if:
for j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N, j(cid:122)i: V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)j(cid:64)(cid:116)V(cid:11)s(cid:99)(cid:12)(cid:62)j(cid:64)
j i
This condition comes from condition CGS above and from the fact that S was already a
consistent global state. A given state may in general be reached from several states at the
previous level, so the monitor should take care to evaluate the consistency of each state
only once.


===== page 642 =====
624 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
Figure 14.17 Evaluating definitely(cid:73)
Level 0 F
1 F
2 F F = ((cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:32)(cid:3)False);(cid:3)T = ((cid:73)(cid:11)S(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:32)(cid:3)True)
3 F T
4 F –
5 ?
14.6.4 Evaluatingdefinitely(cid:73)
To evaluate definitely (cid:73), the monitor again traverses the lattice of reachable states a level
at a time, starting from the initial state (cid:11)s0 (cid:15)s0 (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s0 (cid:12). The algorithm (shown in Figure
1 2 N
14.16) again assumes that the execution is infinite but may easily be adapted for a finite
execution. It maintains the set States, which contains those states at the current level that
may be reached on a linearization from the initial state by traversing only states for
which (cid:73) evaluates to False. As long as such a linearization exists, we may not assert
definitely (cid:73): the execution could have taken this linearization, and (cid:73) would be False at
every stage along it. If we reach a level for which no such linearization exists, we may
conclude definitely (cid:73).
In Figure 14.17, at level 3 the set States consists of only one state, which is
reachable by a linearization on which all states are False (marked in bold lines). The
only state considered at level 4 is the one marked ‘F’. (The state to its right is not
considered, since it can only be reached via a state for which (cid:73)(cid:3)evaluates to True.) If (cid:73)
evaluates to True in the state at level 5, then we may conclude definitely (cid:73). Otherwise,
the algorithm must continue beyond this level.
Cost • The algorithms we have just described are combinatorially explosive. Suppose
that k is the maximum number of events at a single process. Then the algorithms we have
N
described entail O(cid:11)k (cid:12) comparisons (the monitor compares the states of each of the N
observed processes with one another).
There is also a space cost to these algorithms of O(cid:11)kN(cid:12). However, we observe
that the monitor may delete a message containing state s from queue Q when no other
i i
item of state arriving from another process could possibly be involved in a consistent
global state containing s . That is, when:
i
last
V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)i(cid:64)(cid:33)V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)i(cid:64) for j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N(cid:15)j(cid:122)i
j i
last
where s is the last state that the monitor has received from process p .
j j


===== page 643 =====
SECTION 14.6 DISTRIBUTED DEBUGGING 625
14.6.5 Evaluatingpossibly (cid:73)(cid:3)anddefinitely(cid:73)(cid:3)insynchronous systems
The algorithms we have given so far work in an asynchronous system: we have made no
timing assumptions. But the price paid for this is that the monitor may examine a
consistent global state S = (cid:11)s (cid:15)s (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s (cid:12) for which any two local states s and s
1 2 N i j
occurred an arbitrarily long time apart in the actual execution of the system. Our
requirement, by contrast, is to consider only those global states that the actual execution
could in principle have traversed.
In a synchronous system, suppose that the processes keep their physical clocks
internally synchronized within a known bound, and that the observed processes provide
physical timestamps as well as vector timestamps in their state messages. Then the
monitor need consider only those consistent global states whose local states could
possibly have existed simultaneously, given the approximate synchronization of the
clocks. With good enough clock synchronization, these will number many less than all
globally consistent states.
We now give an algorithm to exploit synchronized clocks in this way. We assume
that each observed process p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N) and the monitor, which we shall call
i
p , keep a physical clock C (i = 0(cid:15)1(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N). These are synchronized to within a
0 i
known bound D(cid:33)0; that is, at the same real time:
C (cid:11)t(cid:12)–C (cid:11)t(cid:12) (cid:31)D for i(cid:15)j = 0(cid:15)1(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N
i j
The observed processes send both their vector time and physical time with their state
messages to the monitor. The monitor now applies a condition that not only tests for
consistency of a global state S = (cid:11)s (cid:15)s (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)s (cid:12), but also tests whether each pair of
1 2 N
states could have happened at the same real time, given the physical clock values. In
other words, for i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N:
V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)i(cid:64)(cid:116)V(cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:62)i(cid:64) and s and s could have occurred at the same real time.
i j i j
The first clause is the condition that we used earlier. For the second clause, note that p
i
is in the state s from the time it first notifies the monitor, C (cid:11)s (cid:12), to some later local
i i i
time L (cid:11)s (cid:12)–say, when the next state transition occurs at p . For s and s to have
i i i i j
obtained at the same real time we thus have, allowing for the bound on clock
synchronization:
C (cid:11)s (cid:12)–D(cid:100)C (cid:11)s (cid:12)(cid:100)L (cid:11)s (cid:12)+D – or vice versa(swapping i and j).
i i j j i i
The monitor must calculate a value for L (cid:11)s (cid:12), which is measured against p ’s clock. If
i i i
the monitor has received a state message for p ’s next state s(cid:99), then L (cid:11)s (cid:12) is C (cid:11)s(cid:99)(cid:12).
i i i i i i
Otherwise, the monitor estimates L (cid:11)s (cid:12) as C –max+D, where C is the monitor’s
i i 0 0
current local clock value and max is the maximum transmission time for a state message.


===== page 644 =====
626 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
14.7 Summary
This chapter began by describing the importance of accurate timekeeping for distributed
systems. It then described algorithms for synchronizing clocks despite the drift between
them and the variability of message delays between computers.
The degree of synchronization accuracy that is practically obtainable fulfils many
requirements but is nonetheless not sufficient to determine the ordering of an arbitrary
pair of events occurring at different computers. The happened-beforerelation is a partial
order on events that reflects a flow of information between them – within a process, or
via messages between processes. Some algorithms require events to be ordered in
happened-beforeorder, for example, successive updates made to separate copies of data.
Lamport clocks are counters that are updated in accordance with the happened-before
relationship between events. Vector clocks are an improvement on Lamport clocks, in
that it is possible to determine by examining their vector timestamps whether two events
are ordered by happened-beforeor are concurrent.
We introduced the concepts of events, local and global histories, cuts, local and
global states, runs, consistent states, linearizations (consistent runs) and reachability. A
consistent state or run is one that is in accord with the happened-beforerelation.
We went on to consider the problem of recording a consistent global state by
observing a system’s execution. Our objective was to evaluate a predicate on this state.
An important class of predicates are the stable predicates. We described the snapshot
algorithm of Chandy and Lamport, which captures a consistent global state and allows
us to make assertions about whether a stable predicate holds in the actual execution. We
went on to give Marzullo and Neiger’s algorithm for deriving assertions about whether
a predicate held or may have held in the actual run. This algorithm employs a monitor
process to collect states. The monitor examines vector timestamps to extract consistent
global states, and it constructs and examines the lattice of all consistent global states.
This algorithm involves great computational complexity but is valuable for
understanding and can be of some practical benefit in real systems where relatively few
events change the global predicate’s value. The algorithm has a more efficient variant in
synchronous systems, where clocks may be synchronized.


===== page 645 =====
EXERCISES 627
EXERCISES
14.1 Why is computer clock synchronization necessary? Describe the design requirements
for a system to synchronize the clocks in a distributed system. page 596
14.2 A clock is reading 10:27:54.0 (hr:min:sec) when it is discovered to be 4 seconds fast.
Explain why it is undesirable to set it back to the right time at that point and show
(numerically) how it should be adjusted so as to be correct after 8 seconds have elapsed.
page 600
14.3 A scheme for implementing at-most-once reliable message delivery uses synchronized
clocks to reject duplicate messages. Processes place their local clock value (a
‘timestamp’) in the messages they send. Each receiver keeps a table giving, for each
sending process, the largest message timestamp it has seen. Assume that clocks are
synchronized to within 100 ms, and that messages can arrive at most 50 ms after
transmission.
i) When may a process ignore amessage bearing a timestamp T, if it has recorded
the last message received from that process as having timestamp T(cid:99)?
ii) When may a receiver remove a timestamp 175,000 (ms) from its table? (Hint: use
the receiver’s local clock value.)
iii) Should the clocks be internally synchronized or externally synchronized?
page 601
14.4 Aclient attempts to synchronize with a time server. It records the round-trip times and
timestamps returned by the server in the table below.
Which of these times should it use to set its clock? To what time should it set it?
Estimate the accuracy of the setting with respect to the server’s clock. If it is known that
the time between sending and receiving a message in the system concerned is at least 8
ms, do your answers change?
Round-trip (ms) Time (hr:min:sec)
22 10:54:23.674
25 10:54:25.450
20 10:54:28.342
page 601
14.5 In the system of Exercise 14.4 it is required to synchronize a file server’s clock to within
±1 millisecond. Discuss this in relation to Cristian’s algorithm. page601
14.6 What reconfigurations wouldyou expect to occur in the NTP synchronization subnet?
page 604
14.7 An NTP server B receives server A’s message at 16:34:23.480, bearing a timestamp of
16:34:13.430, and replies to it. A receives the message at 16:34:15.725, bearing B’s
timestamp, 16:34:25.7. Estimate the offset between B and A and the accuracy of the
estimate. page 605


===== page 646 =====
628 CHAPTER 14 TIME AND GLOBAL STATES
14.8 Discuss the factors to be taken into account when deciding to which NTP server a client
should synchronize its clock. page 606
14.9 Discusshow it is possible to compensate for clock drift between synchronization points
by observing the drift rate over time. Discuss any limitations to your method. page607
14.10 By considering a chain of zero or more messages connecting events e and e(cid:99) and using
induction, show that e(cid:111)e(cid:99)(cid:159)L(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)L(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12). page 608
14.11 Show that V (cid:62)i(cid:64)(cid:100)V (cid:62)i(cid:64) . page 609
j i
14.12 In a similar fashion to Exercise 14.10, show that e(cid:111)e(cid:99)(cid:159)V(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)V(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12). page 610
14.13 Using the result of Exercise 14.11, show that if events e and e(cid:99) are concurrent then
neither V(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:100)V(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12) nor V(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12)(cid:100)V(cid:11)e(cid:12). Hence show that if V(cid:11)e(cid:12)(cid:31)V(cid:11)e(cid:99)(cid:12) then e(cid:111)e(cid:99).
page 610
14.14 Two processes P and Q are connected in a ring using two channels, and they constantly
rotate a message m. At any one time, there is only one copy of m in the system. Each
process’s state consists of the number of times it has received m, and P sends m first. At
a certain point, P has the message and its state is 101. Immediately after sending m,P
initiates the snapshot algorithm. Explain the operation of the algorithm in this case,
giving the possible global state(s) reported by it. page 615
p1
Time
p2
14.15 The figure above shows events occurring for each of two processes, p and p . Arrows
1 2
between processes denote message transmission.
Draw and label the lattice of consistent states (p state, p state), beginning with
1 2
the initial state (0,0).
page 622
14.16 Jones is running a collection of processes p (cid:15)p (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)p . Each process p contains a
1 2 N i
variable v . She wishes to determine whether all the variables v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v were ever
i 1 2 N
equal in the course of the execution.
i) Jones’ processes run in a synchronous system. She uses a monitor process to
determine whether the variables were ever equal. When should the application
processes communicate with the monitor process, and what should their messages
contain?
ii) Explain the statement possibly (v = v = (cid:125) = v ). How can Jones determine
1 2 N
whether this statement is true of her execution?
page 623


===== page 647 =====
15
COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
15.1 Introduction
15.2 Distributed mutual exclusion
15.3 Elections
15.4 Coordination and agreement in group communication
15.5 Consensus and related problems
15.6 Summary
In this chapter, we introduce some topics and algorithms related to the issue of how
processes coordinate their actions and agree on shared values in distributed systems,
despite failures. The chapter begins with algorithms to achieve mutual exclusion among
a collection of processes, so as to coordinate their accesses to shared resources. It goes
on to examine how an election can be implemented in a distributed system – that is, how
a group of processes can agree on a new coordinator of their activities after the previous
coordinator has failed.
The second half of the chapter examines the related problems of group
communication, consensus, Byzantine agreement and interactive consistency. In the
context of group communication, the issue is how to agree on such matters as the order
in which messages are to be delivered. Consensus and the other problems generalize from
this: how can any collection of processes agree on some value, no matter what the domain
of the values in question? We encounter a fundamental result in the theory of distributed
systems: that under certain conditions – including surprisingly benign failure conditions
– it is impossible to guarantee that processes will reach consensus.
629


===== page 648 =====
630 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
15.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces a collection of algorithms whose goals vary but that share an aim
that is fundamental in distributed systems: for a set of processes to coordinate their
actions or to agree on one or more values. For example, in the case of a complex piece
of machinery such as a spaceship, it is essential that the computers controlling it agree
on such conditions as whether the spaceship’s mission is proceeding or has been
aborted. Furthermore, the computers must coordinate their actions correctly with respect
to shared resources (the spaceship’s sensors and actuators). The computers must be able
to do so even where there is no fixed master-slave relationship between the components
(which would make coordination particularly simple). The reason for avoiding fixed
master-slave relationships is that we often require our systems to keep working correctly
even if failures occur, so we need to avoid single points of failure, such as fixed masters.
An important distinction for us, as in Chapter 14, will be whether the distributed
system under study is asynchronous or synchronous. In an asynchronous system we can
make no timing assumptions. In a synchronous system, we shall assume that there are
bounds on the maximum message transmission delay, on the time taken to execute each
step of a process, and on clock drift rates. The synchronous assumptions allow us to use
timeouts to detect process crashes.
Another important aim of the chapter is to consider failures, and how to deal with
them when designing algorithms. Section 2.4.2 introduced a failure model, which we
shall use in this chapter. Coping with failures is a subtle business, so we begin by
considering some algorithms that tolerate no failures and progress through benign
failures before exploring how to tolerate arbitrary failures. Along the way, we encounter
a fundamental result in the theory of distributed systems: even under surprisingly benign
failure conditions, it is impossible to guarantee in an asynchronous system that a
collection of processes can agree on a shared value – for example, for all of a spaceship’s
controlling processes to agree ‘mission proceed’ or ‘mission abort’.
Section 15.2 examines the problem of distributed mutual exclusion. This is the
extension to distributed systems of the familiar problem of avoiding race conditions in
kernels and multi-threaded applications. Since much of what occurs in distributed
systems is resource sharing, this is an important problem to solve. Next, Section 15.3
introduces the related but more general issue of how to ‘elect’ one of a collection of
processes to perform a special role. For example, in Chapter 14 we saw how processes
synchronize their clocks to a designated time server. If this server fails and several
surviving servers can fulfil that role, then for the sake of consistency it is necessary to
choose just one server to take over.
Coordination and agreement related to group communication is the subject of
Section15.4. As Section 4.4.1 explained, the ability to multicast a message to a group is
a very useful communication paradigm, with applications from locating resources to
coordinating the updates to replicated data. Section 15.4 examines multicast reliability
and ordering semantics, and gives algorithms to achieve the variations. Multicast
delivery is essentially a problem of agreement between processes: the recipients agree
on which messages they will receive, and in which order they will receive them. Section
15.5 discusses the problem of agreement more generally, primarily in the forms known
as consensus and Byzantine agreement.


===== page 649 =====
SECTION 15.1 INTRODUCTION 631
Figure 15.1 A network partition
Crashed
router
The treatment followed in this chapter involves stating the assumptions and the
goals to be met, and giving an informal account of why the algorithms presented are
correct. There is insufficient space to provide a more rigorous approach. For that, we
refer the reader to a text that gives a thorough account of distributed algorithms, such as
Attiya and Welch [1998] and Lynch [1996].
Before presenting the problems and algorithms, we discuss failure assumptions
and the practical matter of detecting failures in distributed systems.
15.1.1 Failure assumptionsandfailuredetectors
For the sake of simplicity, this chapter assumes that each pair of processes is connected
by reliable channels. That is, although the underlying network components may suffer
failures, the processes use a reliable communication protocol that masks these failures –
for example, by retransmitting missing or corrupted messages. Also for the sake of
simplicity, we assume that no process failure implies a threat to the other processes’
ability to communicate. This means that none of the processes depends upon another to
forward messages.
Note that a reliable channel eventually delivers a message to the recipient’s input
buffer. In a synchronous system, we suppose that there is hardware redundancy where
necessary, so that a reliable channel not only eventually delivers each message despite
underlying failures, but does so within a specified time bound.
In any particular interval of time, communication between some processes may
succeed while communication between others is delayed. For example, the failure of a
router between two networks may mean that a collection of four processes is split into
two pairs, such that intra-pair communication is possible over their respective networks;
but inter-pair communication is not possible while the router has failed. This is known
as a network partition (Figure 15.1). Over a point-to-point network such as the Internet,
complex topologies and independent routing choices mean that connectivity may be
asymmetric: communication is possible from process p to process q, but not vice versa.
Connectivity may also be intransitive: communication is possible from p to q and from
q to r, but p cannot communicate directly with r. Thus our reliability assumption entails
that eventually any failed link or router will be repaired or circumvented. Nevertheless,
the processes may not all be able to communicate at the same time.


===== page 650 =====
632 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
The chapter assumes, unless we state otherwise, that processes fail only by
crashing – an assumption that is good enough for many systems. In Section 15.5, we
shall consider how to treat the cases where processes have arbitrary (Byzantine) failures.
Whatever the type of failure, a correct process is one that exhibits no failures at any
point in the execution under consideration. Note that correctness applies to the whole
execution, not just to a part of it. So a process that suffers a crash failure is ‘non-failed’
before that point, not ‘correct’ before that point.
One of the problems in the design of algorithms that can overcome process crashes
is that of deciding when a process has crashed. A failure detector [Chandra and Toueg
1996, Stelling et al. 1998] is a service that processes queries about whether a particular
process has failed. It is often implemented by an object local to each process (on the
same computer) that runs a failure-detection algorithm in conjunction with its
counterparts at other processes. The object local to each process is called a local failure
detector. We outline how to implement failure detectors shortly, but first we concentrate
on some of the properties of failure detectors.
A failure ‘detector’ is not necessarily accurate. Most fall into the category of
unreliable failure detectors. An unreliable failure detector may produce one of two
values when given the identity of a process: Unsuspected or Suspected. Both of these
results are hints, which may or may not accurately reflect whether the process has
actually failed. A result of Unsuspected signifies that the detector has recently received
evidence suggesting that the process has not failed; for example, a message was recently
received from it. But of course, the process may have failed since then. A result of
Suspected signifies that the failure detector has some indication that the process may
have failed. For example, it may be that no message from the process has been received
for more than a nominal maximum length of silence (even in an asynchronous system,
practical upper bounds can be used as hints). The suspicion may be misplaced: for
example, the process could be functioning correctly but be on the other side of a network
partition, or it could be running more slowly than expected.
Areliable failure detector is one that is always accurate in detecting a process’s
failure. It answers processes’ queries with either a response of Unsuspected – which, as
before, can only be a hint – or Failed. A result of Failed means that the detector has
determined that the process has crashed. Recall that a process that has crashed stays that
way, since by definition a process never takes another step once it has crashed.
It is important to realize that, although we speak of one failure detector acting for
a collection of processes, the response that the failure detector gives to a process is only
as good as the information available at that process. A failure detector may sometimes
give different responses to different processes, since communication conditions vary
from process to process.
We can implement an unreliable failure detector using the following algorithm.
Each process p sends a ‘p is here’ message to every other process, and it does this every
T seconds. The failure detector uses an estimate of the maximum message transmission
time of D seconds. If the local failure detector at process q does not receive a ‘p is here’
message within T+D seconds of the last one, then it reports to q that p is Suspected.
However, if it subsequently receives a ‘p is here’ message, then it reports to q that p is
OK.
In a real distributed system, there are practical limits on message transmission
times. Even email systems give up after a few days, since it is likely that communication


===== page 651 =====
SECTION 15.2 DISTRIBUTED MUTUAL EXCLUSION 633
links and routers will have been repaired in that time. If we choose small values for T
and D (so that they total 0.1 second, say), then the failure detector is likely to suspect
non-crashed processes many times, and much bandwidth will be taken up with ‘p is
here’ messages. If we choose a large total timeout value (a week, say), then crashed
processes will often be reported as Unsuspected.
A practical solution to this problem is to use timeout values that reflect the
observed network delay conditions. If a local failure detector receives a ‘p is here’ in 20
seconds instead of the expected maximum of 10 seconds, it can reset its timeout value
for p accordingly. The failure detector remains unreliable, and its answers to queries are
still only hints, but the probability of its accuracy increases.
In a synchronous system, our failure detector can be made into a reliable one. We
can choose D so that it is not an estimate but an absolute bound on message transmission
times; the absence of a ‘p is here’ message within T+D seconds entitles the local
failure detector to conclude that p has crashed.
The reader may wonder whether failure detectors are of any practical use.
Unreliable failure detectors may suspect a process that has not failed (they may be
inaccurate), and they may not suspect a process that has in fact failed (they may be
incomplete). Reliable failure detectors, on the other hand, require that the system is
synchronous (and few practical systems are).
We have introduced failure detectors because they help us to think about the
nature of failures in a distributed system. And any practical system that is designed to
cope with failures must detect them – however imperfectly. But it turns out that even
unreliable failure detectors with certain well-defined properties can help us to provide
practical solutions to the problem of coordinating processes in the presence of failures.
We return to this point in Section 15.5.
15.2 Distributed mutual exclusion
Distributed processes often need to coordinate their activities. If a collection of
processes share a resource or collection of resources, then often mutual exclusion is
required to prevent interference and ensure consistency when accessing the resources.
This is the critical section problem, familiar in the domain of operating systems. In a
distributed system, however, neither shared variables nor facilities supplied by a single
local kernel can be used to solve it, in general. We require a solution to distributed
mutual exclusion: one that is based solely on message passing.
In some cases shared resources are managed by servers that also provide
mechanisms for mutual exclusion – Chapter 16 describes how some servers synchronize
client accesses to resources. But in some practical cases, a separate mechanism for
mutual exclusion is required.
Consider users who update a text file. A simple means of ensuring that their
updates are consistent is to allow them to access it only one at a time, by requiring the
editor to lock the file before updates can be made. NFS file servers, described in Chapter
12, are designed to be stateless and therefore do not support file locking. For this reason,
UNIX systems provide a separate file-locking service, implemented by the daemon
lockd, to handle locking requests from clients.


===== page 652 =====
634 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
A particularly interesting example is where there is no server, and a collection of
peer processes must coordinate their accesses to shared resources amongst themselves.
This occurs routinely on networks such as Ethernets and IEEE 802.11 wireless networks
in ‘ad hoc’ mode, where network interfaces cooperate as peers so that only one node
transmits at a time on the shared medium. Consider, also, a system monitoring the
number of vacancies in a car park with a process at each entrance and exit that tracks the
number of vehicles entering and leaving. Each process keeps a count of the total number
of vehicles within the car park and displays whether or not it is full. The processes must
update the shared count of the number of vehicles consistently. There are several ways
of achieving that, but it would be convenient for these processes to be able to obtain
mutual exclusion solely by communicating among themselves, eliminating the need for
a separate server.
It is useful to have a generic mechanism for distributed mutual exclusion at our
disposal – one that is independent of the particular resource management scheme in
question. We now examine some algorithms for achieving that.
15.2.1 Algorithms for mutual exclusion
We consider a system of N processes p(cid:15)i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N, that do not share variables.
i
The processes access common resources,but they do so in a critical section. For the sake
of simplicity, we assume that there is only one critical section. It is straightforward to
extend the algorithms we present to more than one critical section.
We assume that the system is asynchronous, that processes do not fail and that
message delivery is reliable, so that any message sent is eventually delivered intact,
exactly once.
The application-level protocol for executing a critical section is as follows:
enter() //enter critical section – block if necessary
resourceAccesses() // access shared resources in critical section
exit() // leave critical section – other processes may now enter
Our essential requirements for mutual exclusion are as follows:
ME1:(safety) At most one process may execute in the critical section
(CS) at a time.
ME2:(liveness) Requests to enter and exitthe critical section eventually
succeed.
Condition ME2implies freedom from both deadlock and starvation. A deadlock would
involve two or more of the processes becoming stuck indefinitely while attempting to
enter or exit the critical section, by virtue of their mutual interdependence. But even
without a deadlock, a poor algorithm might lead to starvation: the indefinite
postponement of entry for a process that has requested it.
The absence of starvation is a fairness condition. Another fairness issue is the
order in which processes enter the critical section. It is not possible to order entry to the
critical section by the times that the processes requested it, because of the absence of
global clocks. But a useful fairness requirement that is sometimes made makes use of
the happened-before ordering (Section 14.4) between messages that request entry to the
critical section:


===== page 653 =====
SECTION 15.2 DISTRIBUTED MUTUAL EXCLUSION 635
Figure 15.2 Server managing a mutual exclusion token for a set of processes
Server
Queue of
requests
4
2
3. Grant
token
1. Request
token
2. Release
p
p token 4
1
p
p 2 3
ME3:((cid:111) ordering) If one request to enter the CS happened-beforeanother,
then entry to the CS is granted in that order.
If a solution grants entry to the critical section in happened-before order, and if all
requests are related by happened-before, then it is not possible for a process to enter the
critical section more than once while another waits to enter. This ordering also allows
processes to coordinate their accesses to the critical section. A multi-threaded process
may continue with other processing while a thread waits to be granted entry to a critical
section. During this time, it might send a message to another process, which
consequently also tries to enter the critical section. ME3 specifies that the first process
be granted access before the second.
We evaluate the performance of algorithms for mutual exclusion according to the
following criteria:
(cid:129) thebandwidth consumed, which is proportional to the number of messages sent in
eachentry and exit operation;
(cid:129) theclient delay incurred by a process at each entry and exit operation;
(cid:129) the algorithm’s effect upon the throughput of the system. This is the rate at which
the collection of processes as a whole can access the critical section, given that
some communication is necessary between successive processes. We measure the
effect using the synchronization delay between one process exiting the critical
section and the next process entering it; the throughput is greater when the
synchronization delay is shorter.
We do not take the implementation of resource accesses into account in our descriptions.
We do, however, assume that the client processes are well behaved and spend a finite
time accessing resources within their critical sections.
Thecentralserveralgorithm • The simplest way to achieve mutual exclusion is to
employ a server that grants permission to enter the critical section. Figure 15.2 shows
the use of this server. To enter a critical section, a processsends a request message to


===== page 654 =====
636 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.3 A ring of processes transferring a mutual exclusion token
p
1 p
2
p
n
p
3
p
4
Token
the server and awaits a reply from it. Conceptually, the reply constitutes a token
signifying permission to enter the critical section. If no other process has the token at the
time of the request, then the server replies immediately, granting the token. If the token
is currently held by another process, then the server does not reply, but queues the
request. When a process exits the critical section, it sends a message to the server, giving
it back the token.
If the queue of waiting processes is not empty,then the server chooses the oldest
entry in the queue, removes it and replies to the corresponding process. The chosen
process then holds the token. In the figure, we show a situation in which p ’s request
2
has been appended to the queue, which already contained p ’s request. p exits the
4 3
critical section, and the server removes p ’s entry and grants permission to enter to p
4 4
by replying to it. Process p does not currently require entry to the critical section.
1
Given our assumption that no failures occur, it is easy to see that the safety and
liveness conditions are met by this algorithm. The reader should verify, however, that
the algorithm does not satisfy property ME3.
We now evaluate the performance of this algorithm. Entering the critical section
– even when no process currently occupies it – takes two messages (a request followed
by a grant) and delays the requesting process by the time required for this round-trip.
Exiting the critical section takes one release message. Assuming asynchronous message
passing, this does not delay the exiting process.
The server may become a performance bottleneck for the system as a whole. The
synchronization delay is the time taken for a round-trip: a release message to the server,
followed by a grant message to the next process to enter the critical section.
Aring-basedalgorithm • One of the simplest ways to arrange mutual exclusion between
theN processes without requiring an additional process is to arrange them in a logical
ring. This requires only that each process p has a communication channel to the next
i
process in the ring, p . The idea is that exclusion is conferred by obtaining a
(cid:11)i+1(cid:12)mod N
token in the form of a message passed from process to process in a single direction –


===== page 655 =====
SECTION 15.2 DISTRIBUTED MUTUAL EXCLUSION 637
Figure 15.4 Ricart and Agrawala’s algorithm
On initialization
state := RELEASED;
To enter the section
state := WANTED;
Multicast request to all processes; Request processing deferred here
T := request’s timestamp;
Wait until (number of replies received = (N – 1));
state := HELD;
On receipt of a request <Ti,pi> at pj (i(cid:143) j)
if (state = HELD or (state = WANTED and (T,pj) < (Ti,pi)))
then
queuerequest from pi without replying;
else
reply immediately to pi;
end if
To exit the critical section
state := RELEASED;
reply to any queued requests;(cid:3)
clockwise, say – around the ring. The ring topology may be unrelated to the physical
interconnections between the underlying computers.
If a process does not require to enter the critical section when it receives the token,
then it immediately forwards the token to its neighbour. A process that requires the token
waits until it receives it, but retains it. To exit the critical section, the process sends the
token on to its neighbour.
The arrangement of processes is shown in Figure 15.3. It is straightforward to
verify that the conditions ME1andME2are met by this algorithm, but that the token is
not necessarily obtained in happened-before order. (Recall that the processes may
exchange messages independently of the rotation of the token.)
This algorithm continuously consumes network bandwidth (except when a
process is inside the critical section): the processes send messages around the ring even
when no process requires entry to the critical section. The delay experienced by a
process requesting entry to the critical section is between 0 messages (when it has just
received the token) and N messages (when it has just passed on the token). To exit the
critical section requires only one message. The synchronization delay between one
process’s exit from the critical section and the next process’s entry is anywhere from 1
toN message transmissions.
Analgorithmusingmulticastandlogicalclocks • Ricart and Agrawala [1981] devel-
oped an algorithm to implement mutual exclusion between N peer processes that is
based upon multicast. The basic idea is that processes that require entry to a critical sec-
tion multicast a request message, and can enter it only when all the other processes have


===== page 656 =====
638 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.5 Multicast synchronization
41
41 p
3
p Reply
1
Reply 34
Reply
34
41
p 34
2
replied to this message. The conditions under which a process replies to a request are
designed to ensure that conditions ME1–ME3 are met.
The processes p (cid:15)p (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)p bear distinct numeric identifiers. They are assumed
1 2 N
to possess communication channels to one another, and each process p keeps a
i
Lamport clock, updated according to the rules LC1 and LC2 of Section 14.4. Messages
requesting entry are of the form <T(cid:15)p >, where T is the sender’s timestamp and p is
i i
the sender’s identifier.
Each process records its state of being outside the critical section (RELEASED),
wanting entry (WANTED) or being in the critical section (HELD) in a variable state. The
protocol is given in Figure 15.4.
If a process requests entry and the state of all other processes is RELEASED, then
all processes will reply immediately to the request and the requester will obtain entry. If
some process is in the state HELD, then that process will not reply to requests until it has
finished with the critical section, and so the requester cannot gain entry in the meantime.
If two or more processes request entry at the same time, then whichever process’s
request bears the lowest timestamp will be the first to collect N–1 replies, granting it
entry next. If the requests bear equal Lamport timestamps, the requests are ordered
according to the processes’ corresponding identifiers. Note that, when a process requests
entry, it defers processing requests from other processes until its own request has been
sent and it has recorded the timestamp T of the request. This is so that processes make
consistent decisions when processing requests.
This algorithm achieves the safety property ME1. If it were possible for two
processes p and p (i(cid:122)j) to enter the critical section at the same time, then both of
i j
those processes would have to have replied to the other. But since the pairs <T(cid:15)p > are
i i
totally ordered, this is impossible. We leave the reader to verify that the algorithm also
meets requirements ME2and ME3.
To illustrate the algorithm, consider a situation involving three processes, p , p
1 2
and p , shown in Figure 15.5. Let us assume that p is not interested in entering the
3 3
critical section, and that p and p request entry concurrently. The timestamp of p ’s
1 2 1
request is 41, and that of p is 34. When p receives their requests, it replies
2 3


===== page 657 =====
SECTION 15.2 DISTRIBUTED MUTUAL EXCLUSION 639
immediately. When p receives p ’s request, it finds that its own request has the lower
2 1
timestamp and so does not reply, holding p off. However, p finds that p ’s request
1 1 2
has a lower timestamp than that of its own request and so replies immediately. On
receiving this second reply, p can enter the critical section. When p exits the critical
2 2
section, it will reply to p ’s request and so grant it entry.
1
Gaining entry takes 2(cid:11)N–1(cid:12) messages in this algorithm: N–1 to multicast the
request, followed by N–1 replies. Or, if there is hardware support for multicast, only
one message is required for the request; the total is then N messages. It is thus a more
expensive algorithm, in terms of bandwidth consumption, than the algorithms just
described. However, the client delay in requesting entry is again a round-trip time
(ignoring any delay incurred in multicasting the request message).
The advantage of this algorithm is that its synchronization delay is only one
message transmission time. Both the previous algorithms incurred a round-trip
synchronization delay.
The performance of the algorithm can be improved. First, note that the process
that last entered the critical section and that has received no other requests for it still goes
through the protocol as described, even though it could simply decide locally to reenter
the critical section. Second, Ricart and Agrawala refined this protocol so that it requires
N messages to obtain entry in the worst (and common) case, without hardware support
for multicast. This is described in Raynal [1988].
Maekawa’svotingalgorithm • Maekawa [1985] observed that in order for a process to
enter a critical section, it is not necessary for all of its peers to grant it access. Processes
need only obtain permission to enter from subsets of their peers, as long as the subsets
used by any two processes overlap. We can think of processes as voting for one another
to enter the critical section. A ‘candidate’ process must collect sufficient votes to enter.
Processes in the intersection of two sets of voters ensure the safety property ME1, that
at most one process can enter the critical section, by casting their votes for only one
candidate.
Maekawa associated a voting set V with each process p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N),
i i
whereV (cid:142)(cid:94)p (cid:15)p (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)p (cid:96). The sets V are chosen so that, for all i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N:
i 1 1 N i
(cid:129) p (cid:143)V
i i
(cid:129) V (cid:136)V (cid:122)(cid:135) – there is at least one common member of any two voting sets
i j
(cid:129) V = K – to be fair, each process has a voting set of the same size
i
(cid:129) Each process p is contained in M of the voting sets V .
j i
Maekawa showed that the optimal solution, which minimizes K and allows the
processes to achieve mutual exclusion, has K(cid:97) N and M=K (so that each process is
in as many of the voting sets as there are elements in each one of those sets). It is non-
trivial to calculate the optimal sets R . As an approximation, a simple way of deriving
i
sets R such that R (cid:97)2 N is to place the processes in a N by N matrix and let
i i
V be the union of the row and column containing p .
i i
Maekawa’s algorithm is shown in Figure 15.6. To obtain entry to the critical
section, a process p sends request messages to all Kmembers of V (including itself).
i i
p cannot enter the critical section until it has received all K reply messages. When a
i
process p in V receives p ’srequest message, it sends a reply message immediately,
j i i


===== page 658 =====
640 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.6 Maekawa’s algorithm
On initialization
state := RELEASED;
voted := FALSE;
For p to enter the critical section
i
state := WANTED;
Multicast request to all processes in V ;
i
Wait until (number of replies received = K);
state := HELD;
On receiptof a request from p at p
i j
if (state = HELD orvoted = TRUE)
then
queuerequest from p without replying;
i
else
send reply to p ;
i
voted := TRUE;
end if
For p to exit the critical section
i
state := RELEASED;
Multicast release to all processes in V ;
i
On receiptof a release from p at p
i j
if(queue of requests is non-empty)
then
remove head of queue – from p , say;
k
send reply to p ;
k
voted := TRUE;
else
voted := FALSE;
end if
unless either its state is HELD or it has already replied (‘voted’) since it last received a
release message. Otherwise, it queues the request message (in the order of its arrival)
but does not yet reply. When a process receives a release message, it removes the head
of its queue of outstanding requests (if the queue is nonempty) and sends a reply
message (a ‘vote’) in response to it. To leave the critical section, p sends release
i
messages to all K members of V (including itself).
i
This algorithm achieves the safety property, ME1. If it were possible for two
processes p and p to enter the critical section at the same time, then the processes in
i j
V (cid:136)V (cid:122)(cid:135) would have to have voted for both. But the algorithm allows a process to
i j
make at most one vote between successive receipts of a release message, so this
situation is impossible.
Unfortunately, the algorithm is deadlock-prone. Consider three processes, p , p
1 2
and p , with V = (cid:94)p (cid:15)p (cid:96), V = (cid:94)p (cid:15)p (cid:96) and V = (cid:94)p (cid:15)p (cid:96). If the three
3 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 1


===== page 659 =====
SECTION 15.3 ELECTIONS 641
processes concurrently request entry to the critical section, then it is it is possible for p
1
to reply to itself and hold off p , for p to reply to itself and hold off p , and for p to
2 2 3 3
reply to itself and hold off p . Each process has received one out of two replies, and
1
none can proceed.
The algorithm can be adapted [Sanders 1987] so that it becomes deadlock-free. In
the adapted protocol, processes queue outstanding requests in happened-before order, so
that requirement ME3is also satisfied.
The algorithm’s bandwidth utilization is 2 N messages per entry to the critical
section and N messages per exit (assuming no hardware multicast facilities). The total
of 3 N is superior to the 2(cid:11)N–1(cid:12) messages required by Ricart and Agrawala’s
algorithm, if N > 4. The client delay is the same as that of Ricart and Agrawala’s
algorithm, but the synchronization delay is worse: a round-trip time instead of a single
message transmission time.
Faulttolerance • The main points to consider when evaluating the above algorithms
with respect to fault tolerance are:
(cid:129) What happens when messages are lost?
(cid:129) What happens when a process crashes?
None of the algorithms that we have described would tolerate the loss of messages, if
the channels were unreliable. The ring-based algorithm cannot tolerate a crash failure of
any single process. As it stands, Maekawa’s algorithm can tolerate some process crash
failures: if a crashed process is not in a voting set that is required, then its failure will not
affect the other processes. The central server algorithm can tolerate the crash failure of
a client process that neither holds nor has requested the token. The Ricart and Agrawala
algorithm as we have described it can be adapted to tolerate the crash failure of such a
process, by taking it to grant all requests implicitly.
We invite the reader to consider how to adapt the algorithms to tolerate failures,
on the assumption that a reliable failure detector is available. Even with a reliable failure
detector, care is required to allow for failures at any point (including during a recovery
procedure), and to reconstruct the state of the processes after a failure has been detected.
For example, in the central-server algorithm, if the server fails it must be established
whether it or one of the client processes held the token.
We examine the general problem of how processes should coordinate their actions
in the presence of faults in Section 15.5.
15.3 Elections
An algorithm for choosing a unique process to play a particular role is called an election
algorithm. For example, in a variant of our central-server algorithm for mutual
exclusion, the ‘server’ is chosen from among the processes p(cid:15)(cid:11)i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N(cid:12) that
i
need to use the critical section. An election algorithm is needed for this choice. It is
essential that all the processes agree on the choice. Afterwards, if the process that plays
the role of server wishes to retire then another election is required to choose a
replacement.


===== page 660 =====
642 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
We say that a process calls the election if it takes an action that initiates a
particular run of the election algorithm. An individual process does not call more than
one election at a time, but in principle the N processes could call N concurrent elections.
At any point in time, a process p is either a participant – meaning that it is engaged in
i
some run of the election algorithm – or a non-participant – meaning that it is not
currently engaged in any election.
An important requirement is for the choice of elected process to be unique, even
if several processes call elections concurrently. For example, two processes could
decide independently that a coordinator process has failed, and both call elections.
Without loss of generality, we require that the elected process be chosen as the one
with the largest identifier. The ‘identifier’ may be any useful value, as long as the
identifiers are unique and totally ordered. For example, we could elect the process with
the lowest computational load by having each process use <1(cid:101)load,i> as its identifier,
whereload > 0 and the process index i is used to order identifiers with the same load.
Each process p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N) has a variable elected , which will contain the
i i
identifier of the elected process. When the process first becomes a participant in an
election it sets this variable to the special value ‘(cid:65)’ to denote that it is not yet defined.
Our requirements are that, during any particular run of the algorithm:
E1:(safety) A participant process p has elected = (cid:65) or elected =P,
i i i
whereP is chosen as the non-crashed process at the end of
the run with the largest identifier.
E2:(liveness) All processes p participate and eventually either set
i
elected (cid:122)(cid:65) – or crash.
i
Note that there may be processes p that are not yet participants, which record in
j
elected the identifier of the previous elected process.
j
We measure the performance of an election algorithm by its total network
bandwidth utilization (which is proportional to the total number of messages sent), and
by the turnaround time for the algorithm: the number of serialized message transmission
times between the initiation and termination of a single run.
Aring-basedelectionalgorithm • The algorithm of Chang and Roberts [1979] is
suitable for a collection of processes arranged in a logical ring. Each process p has a
i
communication channel to the next process in the ring, p , and all messages
(cid:11)i+1(cid:12)mod N
are sent clockwise around the ring. We assume that no failures occur, and that the system
is asynchronous. The goal of this algorithm is to elect a single process called the
coordinator, which is the process with the largest identifier.
Initially, every process is marked as a non-participant in an election. Any process
can begin an election. It proceeds by marking itself as a participant, placing its identifier
in an election message and sending it to its clockwise neighbour.
When a process receives an election message, it compares the identifier in the
message with its own. If the arrived identifier is greater, then it forwards the message to
its neighbour. If the arrived identifier is smaller and the receiver is not a participant, then
it substitutes its own identifier in the message and forwards it; but it does not forward
the message if it is already a participant. On forwarding an election message in any case,
the process marks itself as a participant.


===== page 661 =====
SECTION 15.3 ELECTIONS 643
Figure 15.7 A ring-based election in progress
3
17
4
24
9
1
15
28 24
Note: The election was started by process 17. The highest process identifier encountered
so far is 24. Participant processes are shown in a darker tint.
If, however, the received identifier is that of the receiver itself, then this process’s
identifier must be the greatest, and it becomes the coordinator. The coordinator marks
itself as a non-participant once more and sends an elected message to its neighbour,
announcing its election and enclosing its identity.
When a process p receives an elected message, it marks itself as a non-
i
participant,sets its variable elected to the identifier in the message and, unless it is the
i
new coordinator, forwards the message to its neighbour.
It is easy to see that condition E1 is met. All identifiers are compared, since a
process must receive its own identifier back before sending an elected message. For any
two processes, the one with the larger identifier will not pass on the other’s identifier. It
is therefore impossible that both should receive their own identifier back.
Condition E2 follows immediately from the guaranteed traversals of the ring
(there are no failures). Note how the non-participant and participant states are used so
that duplicate messages arising when two processes start an election at the same time are
extinguished as soon as possible, and always before the ‘winning’ election result has
been announced.
If only a single process starts an election, then the worst-performing case is when
its anti-clockwise neighbour has the highest identifier. A total of N–1 messages are
then required to reach this neighbour, which will not announce its election until its
identifier has completed another circuit, taking a further N messages. The elected
message is then sent N times, making 3N–1 messages in all. The turnaround time is
also 3N–1, since these messages are sent sequentially.


===== page 662 =====
644 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.8 The bully algorithm
election
C
election
Stage 1
answer
p p p p
1 2 3 4
answer
election
C
election election
Stage 2
answer
p 1 p 2 p 3 p 4
timeout
Stage 3
p p p p
1 2 3 4
Eventually.....
coordinator
C
Stage 4
p p p p
1 2 3 4
The election of coordinator p, after the failure of p and then p
2 4 3
An example of a ring-based election in progress is shown in Figure 15.7. The
election message currently contains 24, but process 28 will replace this with its identifier
when the message reaches it.
While the ring-based algorithm is useful for understanding the properties of
election algorithms in general, the fact that it tolerates no failures makes it of limited
practical value. However, with a reliable failure detector it is in principle possible to re-
constitute the ring when a process crashes.
Thebullyalgorithm • The bully algorithm [Garcia-Molina 1982] allows processes to
crash during an election, although it assumes that message delivery between processes
is reliable. Unlike the ring-based algorithm, this algorithm assumes that the system is
synchronous: it uses timeouts to detect a process failure. Another difference is that the
ring-based algorithm assumed that processes have minimal a priori knowledge of one
another: each knows only how to communicate with its neighbour, and none knows the
identifiers of the other processes. The bully algorithm, on the other hand, assumes that
each process knows which processes have higher identifiers, and that it can
communicate with all such processes.
There are three types of message in this algorithm: an election message is sent to
announce an election; an answer message is sent in response to an election message and
acoordinator message is sent to announce the identity of the elected process – the new


===== page 663 =====
SECTION 15.3 ELECTIONS 645
‘coordinator’. A process begins an election when it notices, through timeouts, that the
coordinator has failed. Several processes may discover this concurrently.
Since the system is synchronous, we can construct a reliable failure detector.
There is a maximum message transmission delay, T , and a maximum delay for
trans
processing a message T . Therefore, we can calculate a time
process
T = 2T +T that is an upper bound on the time that can elapse between
trans process
sending a message to another process and receiving a response. If no response arrives
within time T, then the local failure detector can report that the intended recipient of the
request has failed.
The process that knows it has the highest identifier can elect itself as the
coordinator simply by sending a coordinator message to all processes with lower
identifiers. On the other hand, a process with a lower identifier can begin an election by
sending an election message to those processes that have a higher identifier and awaiting
answer messages in response. If none arrives within time T, the process considers itself
the coordinator and sends a coordinator message to all processes with lower identifiers
announcing this. Otherwise, the process waits a further period T(cid:99) for a coordinator
message to arrive from the new coordinator. If none arrives, it begins another election.
If a process p receives a coordinator message, it sets its variable elected to the
i i
identifier of the coordinator contained within it and treats that process as the coordinator.
If a process receives an election message, it sends back an answer message and
begins another election – unless it has begun one already.
When a process is started to replace a crashedprocess, it begins an election. If it
has the highest process identifier, then it will decide that it is the coordinator and
announce this to the other processes. Thus it will become the coordinator, even though
the current coordinator is functioning. It is for this reason that the algorithm is called the
‘bully’ algorithm.
The operation of the algorithm is shown in Figure 15.8. There are four processes,
p –p . Process p detects the failure of the coordinator p and announces an election
1 4 1 4
(stage 1 in the figure). On receiving an election message from p , processes p and p
1 2 3
send answer messages to p and begin their own elections; p sends an answer
1 3
message to p , but p receives no answer message from the failed process p (stage
2 3 4
2). It therefore decides that it is the coordinator. But before it can send out the
coordinator message, it too fails (stage 3). When p ’s timeout period T(cid:99) expires (which
1
we assume occurs before p ’s timeout expires), it deduces the absence of a coordinator
2
message and begins another election. Eventually, p is elected coordinator (stage 4).
2
This algorithm clearly meets the liveness condition E2, by the assumption of
reliable message delivery. And if no process is replaced, then the algorithm meets
condition E1. It is impossible for two processes to decide that they are the coordinator,
since the process with the lower identifier will discover that the other exists and defer to
it.
But the algorithm is not guaranteed to meet the safety condition E1 if processes
that have crashed are replaced by processes with the same identifiers. A process that
replaces a crashed process p may decide that it has the highest identifier just as another
process (which has detected p’s crash) decides that it has the highest identifier. Two
processes will therefore announce themselves as the coordinator concurrently.
Unfortunately, there are no guarantees on message delivery order, and the recipients of
these messages may reach different conclusions on which is the coordinator process.


===== page 664 =====
646 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Furthermore, condition E1may be broken if the assumed timeout values turn out
to be inaccurate – that is, if the processes’ failure detector is unreliable.
Taking the example just given, suppose that either p had not failed but was just
3
running unusually slowly (that is, that the assumption that the system is synchronous is
incorrect), or that p had failed but was then replaced. Just as p sends its coordinator
3 2
message, p (or its replacement) does the same. p receives p ‘scoordinator message
3 2 3
after it has sent its own and so sets elected = p . Due to variable message
2 3
transmission delays, p receives p ’s coordinator message after p ’s and so
1 2 3
eventually sets elected = p . Condition E1has been broken.
1 2
With regard to the performance of the algorithm, in the best case the process with
the second-highest identifier notices the coordinator’s failure. Then it can immediately
elect itself and send N–2 coordinator messages. The turnaround time is one message.
2
The bully algorithm requires O(cid:11)N (cid:12) messages in the worst case – that is, when the
process with the lowest identifier first detects the coordinator’s failure. For then N–1
processes altogether begin elections, each sending messages to processes with higher
identifiers.
15.4 Coordination and agreement in group communication
This chapter examines the key coordination and agreement problems related to group
communication – that is, how to achieve the desired reliability and ordering properties
across all members of a group. Chapter 6 introduced group communication as an
example of an indirect communication technique whereby processes can send messages
to a group. This message is propagated to all members of the group with certain
guarantees in terms of reliability and ordering. We are particularly seeking reliability in
terms of the properties of validity, integrity and agreement, and ordering in terms of
FIFO ordering, causal ordering and total ordering.
In this chapter, we study multicast communication to groups of processes whose
membership is known. Chapter 18 will expand our study to fully fledged group
communication, including the management of dynamically varying groups.
Systemmodel • The system under consideration contains a collection of processes,
which can communicate reliably over one-to-one channels. As before, processes may
fail only by crashing.
The processes are members of groups, which are the destinations of messages sent
with the multicast operation. It is generally useful to allow processes to be members of
several groups simultaneously – for example, to enable processes to receive information
from several sources by joining several groups. But to simplify our discussion of
ordering properties, we shall sometimes restrict processes to being members of at most
one group at a time.
The operation multicast(g,m) sends the message m to all members of the group g
of processes. Correspondingly, there is an operation deliver(m) that delivers a message
sent by multicast to the calling process. We use the term deliver rather than receive to
make clear that a multicast message is not always handed to the application layer inside


===== page 665 =====
SECTION 15.4 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT IN GROUP COMMUNICATION 647
the process as soon as it is received at the process’s node. This is explained when we
discuss multicast delivery semantics shortly.
Every message m carries the unique identifier of the process sender(m) that sent
it, and the unique destination group identifier group(m). We assume that processes do
not lie about the origin or destinations of messages.
Some algorithms assume that groups are closed (as defined in Chapter 6).
15.4.1 Basic multicast
It is useful to have at our disposal a basic multicast primitive that guarantees, unlike IP
multicast, that a correct process will eventually deliver the message, as long as the
multicaster does not crash. We call the primitive B-multicast and its corresponding basic
delivery primitive B-deliver. We allow processes to belong to several groups, and each
message is destined for some particular group.
A straightforward way to implement B-multicast is to use a reliable one-to-one
send operation, as follows:
ToB-multicast(g,m): for each process p(cid:143)g,send(p, m);
Onreceive(m) at p:B-deliver(m) at p.
Theimplementation may use threads to perform the send operations concurrently, in an
attempt to reduce the total time taken to deliver the message. Unfortunately, such an
implementation is liable to suffer from a so-called ack-implosion if the number of
processes is large. The acknowledgements sent as part of the reliable send operation are
liable to arrive from many processes at about the same time. The multicasting process’s
buffers will rapidly fill, and it is liable to drop acknowledgements. It will therefore
retransmit the message, leading to yet more acknowledgements and further waste of
network bandwidth. A more practical basic multicast service can be built using IP
multicast, and we invite the reader to show this in Exercise 15.10.
15.4.2 Reliable multicast
Chapter 6 discussed reliable multicast in terms of validity, integrity and agreement. This
section builds on this informal discussion, presenting a more complete definition.
Following Hadzilacos and Toueg [1994] and Chandra and Toueg [1996], we
define a reliable multicast with corresponding operations R-multicast and R-deliver.
Properties analogous to integrity and validity are clearly highly desirable in reliable
multicast delivery, but we add another: a requirement that all correct processes in the
group must receive a message if any of them does. It is important to realize that this is
not a property of the B-multicast algorithm that is based on a reliable one-to-one send
operation. The sender may fail at any point while B-multicast proceeds, so some
processes may deliver a message while others do not.
A reliable multicast is one that satisfiesthe following properties:
Integrity: A correct process p delivers a message m at most once. Furthermore,
p(cid:143)group(cid:11)m(cid:12) and m was supplied to a multicast operation by sender(m). (As with
one-to-one communication, messages can always be distinguished by a sequence
number relative to their sender.)


===== page 666 =====
648 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.9 Reliable multicast algorithm
On initialization
Received := {};
For process p to R-multicast message m to group g
B-multicast(g, m); // p(cid:143)g is included as a destination
On B-deliver(m) at process q with g = group(m)
if (m(cid:144)Received)
then
Received := Received(cid:137)(cid:94)m(cid:96);
if (q(cid:122)p) thenB-multicast(g, m);end if
R-deliver m;
end if
Validity: If a correct process multicasts message m, then it will eventually deliver m.
Agreement: If a correct process delivers message m, then all other correct processes
ingroup(m) will eventually deliver m.
The integrity property is analogous to that for reliable one-to-one communication. The
validity property guarantees liveness for the sender. This may seem an unusual property,
because it is asymmetric (it mentions only one particular process). But notice that
validity and agreement together amount to an overall liveness requirement: if one
process (the sender) eventually delivers a message m, since the correct processes agree
on the set of messages they deliver, it follows that m will eventually be delivered to all
the group’s correct members.
The advantage of expressing the validity condition in terms of self-delivery is
simplicity. What we require is that the message be delivered eventually by some correct
member of the group.
The agreement condition is related to atomicity, the property of ‘all or nothing’,
applied to delivery of messages to a group. If a process that multicasts a message crashes
before it has delivered it, then it is possible that the message will not be delivered to any
process in the group; but if it is delivered to some correct process, then all other correct
processes will deliver it. Many papers in the literature use the term ‘atomic’ to include
a total ordering condition; we define this shortly.
ImplementingreliablemulticastoverB-multicast • Figure 15.9 gives a reliable multi-
cast algorithm, with primitives R-multicast and R-deliver, that allows processes to be-
long to several closed groups simultaneously. To R-multicast a message, a process B-
multicasts the message to the processes in the destination group (including itself). When
the message is B-delivered, the recipient in turn B-multicasts the message to the group
(if it is not the original sender), and then R-delivers the message. Since a message may
arrive more than once, duplicates of the message are detected and not delivered.
This algorithm clearly satisfies the validity property, since a correct process will
eventually B-deliver the message to itself. By the integrity property of the underlying
communication channels used in B-multicast, the algorithm also satisfies the integrity
property.


===== page 667 =====
SECTION 15.4 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT IN GROUP COMMUNICATION 649
Agreement follows from the fact that every correct process B-multicasts the
message to the other processes after it has B-delivered it. If a correct process does not R-
deliver the message, then this can only be because it never B-delivered it. That in turn
can only be because no other correct process B-delivered it either; therefore none will
R-deliver it.
The reliable multicast algorithm that we have described is correct in an
asynchronous system, since we made no timing assumptions. But the algorithm is
inefficient for practical purposes. Each message is sent g times to each process.
Reliablemulticastover IPmulticast • An alternative realization of R-multicast is to use
a combination of IP multicast, piggybacked acknowledgements (that is, acknowledge-
ments attached to other messages) and negative acknowledgements. This R-multicast
protocol is based on the observation that IP multicast communication is often successful.
In the protocol, processes do not send separate acknowledgement messages; instead,
they piggyback acknowledgements on the messages that they send to the group. Proc-
esses send a separate response message only when they detect that they have missed a
message. A response indicating the absence of an expected message is known as a neg-
ative acknowledgement.
The description assumes that groups are closed. Each process p maintains a
p
sequence number S for each group g to which it belongs. The sequence number is
g q
initially zero. Each process also records R , the sequence number of the latest message
g
it has delivered from process qthat was sent to group g.
For p to R-multicast a message to group g, it piggybacks onto the message the
p q
value S and acknowledgements, of the form <q, R >. An acknowledgement states, for
g g
some sender q, the sequence number of the latest message from qdestined for g that p
has delivered since it last multicast a message. The multicaster p then IP-multicasts the
p
message with its piggybacked values to g, and increments S by one.
g
The piggybacked values in a multicast message enable the recipients to learn
about messages that they have not received. A process R-delivers a message destined for
p
g bearing the sequence number S from p if and only if S = R +1, and it increments
p g p
R by one immediately after delivery. If an arriving message has S(cid:100)R , then r has
g p g q
delivered the message before and it discards it. If S(cid:33)R +1, or if R(cid:33)R for an
g g
enclosed acknowledgement <q,R>, then there are one or more messages that it has not
yet received (and which are likely to have been dropped, in the first case). It keeps any
p
message for which S(cid:33)R +1 in a hold-back queue (Figure 15.10) – such queues are
g
often used to meet message delivery guarantees. It requests missing messages by
sending negative acknowledgements, either to the original sender or to a process q from
q q
which it has received an acknowledgement <q, R > with R no less than the required
g g
sequence number.
The hold-back queue is not strictly necessary for reliability, but it simplifies the
protocol by enabling us to use sequence numbers to represent sets of delivered
messages. It also provides us with a guarantee of delivery order (see Section 15.4.3).
The integrity property follows from the detection of duplicates and the underlying
properties of IPmulticast (which uses checksums to expunge corrupted messages). The
validity property holds because IP multicast has that property. For agreement we
require, first, that a process can always detect missing messages. That in turn means that
it will always receive a further message that enables it to detect the omission. As this


===== page 668 =====
650 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.10 The hold-back queue for arriving multicast messages
Message
processing
deliver
Hold-back
queue Delivery queue
When delivery
guarantees are
met
Incoming
messages
simplified protocol stands, we guarantee detection of missing messages only in the case
where correct processes multicast messages indefinitely. Second, the agreement
property requires that there is always an available copy of any message needed by a
process that did not receive it. We therefore assume that processes retain copies of the
messages they have delivered – indefinitely, in this simplified protocol.
Neither of the assumptions we made to ensure agreement is practical (see Exercise
15.15). However, agreement is practically addressed in the protocols from which ours is
derived: the Psync protocol [Peterson et al.1989], Trans protocol [Melliar-Smith et al.
1990] and scalable reliable multicast protocol [Floyd et al. 1997]. Psync and Trans also
provide further delivery ordering guarantees.
Uniformproperties • The definition of agreement given above refers only to the
behaviour of correct processes – processes that never fail. Consider what would happen
in the algorithm of Figure 15.9 if a process was not correct and crashed after it had R-
delivered a message. Since any process that R-delivers the message must first B-
multicast it, it follows that all correct processes will still eventually deliver the message.
Any property that holds whether or not processes are correct is called a uniform
property. We define uniform agreement as follows:
Uniform agreement: If a process, whether it is correct or fails, delivers message m,
thenall correct processes in group(m) will eventually deliver m.
Uniform agreement allows a process to crash after it has delivered a message, while still
ensuring that all correct processes will deliver the message. We have argued that the
algorithm of Figure 15.9 satisfies this property, which is stronger than the non-uniform
agreement property defined above.
Uniform agreement is useful in applications where a process may take an action
that produces an observable inconsistency before it crashes. For example, suppose that
the processes are servers that manage copies of a bank account, and that updates to the
account are sent using reliable multicast to the group of servers. If the multicast does not
satisfy uniform agreement, then a client that accesses a server just before it crashes may
observe an update that no other server will process.


===== page 669 =====
SECTION 15.4 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT IN GROUP COMMUNICATION 651
It is interesting to note that if we reverse the lines ‘R-deliver m’ and ‘if (q(cid:122)p)
then B-multicast(g, m); end if’ in Figure 15.9, then the resultant algorithm does not
satisfy uniform agreement.
Just as there is a uniform version of agreement, there are also uniform versions of
anymulticast property, including validity and integrity and the ordering properties that
we are about to define.
15.4.3 Ordered multicast
The basic multicast algorithm of Section 15.4.1 delivers messages to processes in an
arbitrary order, due to arbitrary delays in the underlying one-to-one send operations.
This lack of an ordering guarantee is not satisfactory for many applications. For
example, in a nuclear power plant it may be important that events signifying threats to
safety conditions and events signifying actions by control units are observed in the same
order by all processes in the system.
As discussed in Chapter 6, the common orderingrequirements are total ordering,
causal ordering and FIFO ordering, together with hybrid solutions (in particular, total-
causal and total-FIFO). To simplify our discussion, we define these orderings under the
assumption that any process belongs to at most one group (later we discuss the
implications of allowing groups to overlap):
FIFO ordering: If a correct process issues multicast(g,m) and then multicast(g, m(cid:99)),
then every correct process that delivers m(cid:99) will deliver m before m(cid:99).
Causal ordering: If multicast(g,m) (cid:111) multicast(g, m(cid:99)), where (cid:111) is the
happened-before relation induced only by messages sent between the members of g,
then anycorrect process that delivers m(cid:99) will deliver m before m(cid:99).
Total ordering: If a correct process delivers message m before it delivers m(cid:99), then
any other correct process that delivers m(cid:99) will deliver m before m(cid:99).
Causal ordering implies FIFO ordering, since any two multicasts by the same process
are related by happened-before.Note that FIFO ordering and causal ordering are only
partial orderings: not all messages are sent by the same process, in general; similarly,
some multicasts are concurrent (not ordered by happened-before).
Figure 15.11 illustrates the orderings for the case of three processes. Close
inspection of the figure shows that the totally ordered messages are delivered in the
opposite order to the physical time at which they were sent. In fact, the definition of total
ordering allows message delivery to be ordered arbitrarily, as long as the order is the
same at different processes. Since total ordering is not necessarily also a FIFO or causal
ordering, we define the hybrid of FIFO-total ordering as one for which message delivery
obeys both FIFO and total ordering; similarly, under causal-total ordering message
delivery obeys both causal and total ordering.
The definitions of ordered multicast do not assume or imply reliability. For
example, the reader should check that, under total ordering, if correct process p delivers
message m and then delivers m(cid:99), then a correct process q can deliver m without also
delivering m(cid:99) or any other message ordered after m.
We can also form hybrids of ordered and reliable protocols. A reliable totally
ordered multicast is often referred to in the literature as an atomic multicast. Similarly,


===== page 670 =====
652 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.11 Total, FIFO and causal ordering of multicast messages
T1
T2
F1
F3
F2
Time
C1
C2
C3
P1 P2 P3
Notice the consistent ordering of totally ordered messages T1 and T2, the FIFO-related messages
F1 and F2 and the causally related messages C1 and C3 – and the otherwise arbitrary delivery
ordering of messages
we may form reliable FIFO multicast, reliable causal multicast and reliable versions of
the hybrid ordered multicasts.
Ordering the delivery of multicast messages, as we shall see, can be expensive in
terms of delivery latency and bandwidth consumption. The ordering semantics that we
have described may delay the delivery of messages unnecessarily. That is, at the
application level, a message may be delayed for another message that it does not in fact
depend upon. For this reason, some have proposed multicast systems that use the
application-specific message semantics alone to determine the order of message
delivery [Cheriton and Skeen 1993, Pedone and Schiper 1999].
Theexampleofthebulletinboard • To make multicast delivery semantics more
concrete, consider an application in which users post messages to bulletin boards. Each
user runs a bulletin-board application process. Every topic of discussion has its own
process group. When a user posts a message to a bulletin board, the application


===== page 671 =====
SECTION 15.4 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT IN GROUP COMMUNICATION 653
Figure 15.12 Display from bulletin board program
Bulletin board: os.interesting
Item From Subject
23 A.Hanlon Mach
24 G.Joseph Microkernels
25 A.Hanlon Re: Microkernels
26 T.L’Heureux RPC performance
27 M.Walker Re: Mach
end
multicasts the user’s posting to the corresponding group. Each user’s process is a
member of the group for the topic in which that user is interested, so they will receive
just the postings concerning that topic.
Reliable multicast is required if every user is to receive every posting eventually.
The users also have ordering requirements. Figure 15.12 shows the postings as they
appear to a particular user. At a minimum, FIFO ordering is desirable, since then every
posting from a given user – ‘A.Hanlon’, say – will be received in the same order, and
users can talk consistently about A.Hanlon’s second posting.
Note that the messages whose subjects are ‘Re: Microkernels’ (25) and ‘Re:
Mach’(27) appear after the messages to which they refer. A causally ordered multicast
is needed to guarantee this relationship. Otherwise, arbitrary message delays could mean
that, say, the message ‘Re: Mach’ could appear before the original message about Mach.
If the multicast delivery was totally ordered, then the numbering in the lefthand
column would be consistent between users. Users could refer unambiguously, for
example, to ‘message 24’.
In practice, the USENET bulletin board system implements neither causal nor
total ordering. The communication costs of achieving these orderings on a large scale
outweigh their advantages.
ImplementingFIFOordering • FIFO-ordered multicast (with operations FO-multicast
andFO-deliver) is achieved with sequence numbers, much as we would achieve it for
one-to-one communication. We shall consider only non-overlapping groups. The reader
should verify that the reliable multicast protocol that we defined on top of IP multicast
in Section 15.4.2 also guarantees FIFO ordering, but we shall show how to construct a
p
FIFO-ordered multicast on top of any given basic multicast. We use the variables S
g
q p
and R held at process p from the reliable multicast protocol of Section 15.4.2: S is a
g g
q
count of how many messages p has sent to g and, for each q, R is the sequence number
g
of the latest message p has delivered from process q that was sent to group g.
p
For pto FO-multicast a message to group g, it piggybacks the value S onto the
g
p
message,B-multicasts the message to g and then increments S by 1. Upon receipt of a
g
q
message from q bearing the sequence number S, p checks whether S = R +1. If so,
g
this message is the next one expected from the sender q and p FO-delivers it, setting


===== page 672 =====
654 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
q q
R :=S. If S(cid:33)R +1, it places the message in the hold-back queue until the intervening
g g
q
messages have been delivered and S = R +1.
g
Since all messages from a given sender are delivered in the same sequence, and
since a message’s delivery is delayed until its sequence number has been reached, the
condition for FIFO ordering is clearly satisfied. But this is so only under the assumption
that groups are non-overlapping.
Note that we can use any implementation of B-multicast in this protocol.
Moreover, if we use a reliable R-multicast primitive instead of B-multicast, then we
obtain a reliable FIFO multicast.
Implementingtotalordering • The basic approach to implementing total ordering is to
assign totally ordered identifiers to multicast messages so that each process makes the
same ordering decision based upon these identifiers. The delivery algorithm is very
similar to the one we described for FIFO ordering; the difference is that processes keep
group-specific sequence numbers rather than process-specific sequence numbers. We
only consider how to totally order messages sent to non-overlapping groups. We call the
multicast operations TO-multicast and TO-deliver.
We discuss two main methods for assigning identifiers to messages. The first of
these is for a process called a sequencer to assign them (Figure 15.13). A process
wishing to TO-multicast a message m to group g attaches a unique identifier id(m) to it.
The messages for g are sent to the sequencer for g, sequencer(g), as well as to the
members of g. (The sequencer may be chosen to be a member of g.) The process
sequencer(g) maintains a group-specific sequence number s , which it uses to assign
g
increasing and consecutive sequence numbers to the messages that it B-delivers.
It announces the sequence numbers by B-multicasting order messages to g (see Figure
15.13 for the details).
A message will remain in the hold-back queue indefinitely until it can be TO-
delivered according to the corresponding sequence number. Since the sequence numbers
are well defined (by the sequencer), the criterion for total ordering is met. Furthermore,
if the processes use a FIFO-ordered variant of B-multicast, then the totally ordered
multicast is also causally ordered. We leave the reader to show this.
The obvious problem with a sequencer-based scheme is that the sequencer may
become a bottleneck and is a critical point of failure. Practical algorithms exist that
address the problem of failure. Chang and Maxemchuk [1984] first suggested a
multicast protocol employing a sequencer (which they called a token site). Kaashoek et
al. [1989] developed a sequencer-based protocol for the Amoeba system. These
protocols ensure that a message is in the hold-back queue at f+1 nodes before it is
delivered; up to f failures can thus be tolerated. Like Chang and Maxemchuk, Birman et
al. [1991] also employ a token-holding site that acts as a sequencer. The token can be
passed from process to process so that, for example, if only one process sends totally
ordered multicasts that process can act as the sequencer, saving communication.
The protocol of Kaashoek et al. uses hardware-based multicast – available on an
Ethernet, for example – rather than reliable point-to-point communication. In the
simplest variant of their protocol, processes send the message to be multicast to the
sequencer, one-to-one. The sequencer multicasts the message itself, as well as the
identifier and sequence number. This has the advantage that the other members of the


===== page 673 =====
SECTION 15.4 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT IN GROUP COMMUNICATION 655
Figure 15.13 Total ordering using a sequencer
1. Algorithm for group member p
On initialization: r :=0;
g
To TO-multicast message m to group g
B-multicast(g(cid:137)(cid:94)sequencer(cid:11)g(cid:12)(cid:96), <m, i>);
On B-deliver(<m, i>) with g = group(m)
Place<m, i> in hold-back queue;
On B-deliver(m = <“order”, i, S>) with g = group(m )
order order
wait until<m, i> in hold-back queue and S = r ;
g
TO-deliverm; // (after deleting it from the hold-back queue)
r := S+1;
g
2. Algorithm for sequencer of g
On initialization: s := 0;
g
On B-deliver(<m, i>) with g = group(m)
B-multicast(g, <“order”,i, s >);
g
s := s +1;
g g
group receive only one message per multicast; its disadvantage is increased bandwidth
utilization. The protocol is described in full at www.cdk5.net/coordination.
The second method that we examine for achieving totally ordered multicast is one
in which the processes collectively agree on the assignment of sequence numbers to
messages in a distributed fashion. A simple algorithm – similar to one that was originally
developed to implement totally ordered multicast delivery for the ISIS toolkit [Birman
and Joseph 1987a] – is shown in Figure 15.14. Once more, a process B-multicasts its
message to the members of the group. The groupmay be open or closed. The receiving
processes propose sequence numbers for messages as they arrive and return these to the
sender, which uses them to generate agreed sequence numbers.
q
Each process q in groupg keeps A , the largest agreed sequence number it has
g
q
observed so far for group g, and P , its own largest proposed sequence number. The
g
algorithm for process pto multicast a message m to group g is as follows:
1. pB-multicasts <m,i> to g, where iis a unique identifier for m.
2. Each process q replies to the sender p with a proposal for the message’s agreed
q q q
sequence number of P :=Max(A , P ) + 1. In reality, we must include process
g g g
q
identifiers in the proposed values P to ensure a total order, since otherwise
g
different processes could propose the same integer value; but for the sake of
simplicity we shall not make that explicit here. Each process provisionally assigns
the proposed sequence number to the message and places it in its hold-back queue,
which is ordered with the smallest sequence number at the front.


===== page 674 =====
656 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.14 The ISIS algorithm for total ordering
RMP1
2
3
1Message
11 22 2P
3
ro
A
p
g
o
r
s
e
e
e
d
d
S
S
e
e
q
q
P4
11
22 PFE1
3
P3
3. p collects all the proposed sequence numbers and selects the largest one, a,as the
next agreed sequence number. It then B-multicasts <i, a> to g. Each process q in
q q
g sets A :=Max(A ,a) and attaches a to the message (which is identified by i).
g g
It reorders the message in the hold-back queue if the agreed sequence number
differs from the proposed one. When the message at the front of the hold-back
queue has been assigned its agreed sequence number, it is transferred to the tail of
the delivery queue. Messages that have been assigned their agreed sequence
number but are not at the head of the hold-back queue are not yet transferred,
however.
If every process agrees the same set of sequence numbers and delivers them in the
corresponding order, then total ordering is satisfied. It is clear that correct processes
ultimately agree on the same set of sequence numbers, but we must show that they are
monotonically increasing and that no correct process can deliver a message prematurely.
Assume that a message m has been assigned an agreed sequence number and has
1
reached the front of the hold-back queue. By construction, a message that is received
after this stage will and should be delivered after m : it will have a larger proposed
1
sequence number and thus a larger agreed sequence number than m . So let m be any
1 2
other message that has not yet been assigned its agreed sequence number but that is on
the same queue. We have that:
agreedSequence(m )(cid:149) proposedSequence(m )
2 2
by the algorithm just given. Since m is at the front of the queue:
1
proposedSequence(m ) > agreedSequence(m )
2 1
Therefore:
agreedSequence(m ) > agreedSequence(m )
2 1


===== page 675 =====
SECTION 15.4 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT IN GROUP COMMUNICATION 657
Figure 15.15 Causal ordering using vector timestamps
Algorithm for group member p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N)
i
On initialization
g
V (cid:62)j(cid:64) := 0 (j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)(cid:15)N);
i
To CO-multicast message m to group g
g g
V (cid:62)i(cid:64) := V (cid:62)i(cid:64)+1;
i i
g
B-multicast(g, <V , m>);
i
g
On B-deliver(<V , m>) from p (j(cid:122)i), with g = group(m)
j j
g
place<V , m> in hold-back queue;
j
g g g g
wait until V (cid:62)j(cid:64) = V (cid:62)j(cid:64)+1 and V (cid:62)k(cid:64)(cid:100)V (cid:62)k(cid:64) (k(cid:122)j);
j i j i
CO-deliverm; // after removing it from the hold-back queue
g g
V (cid:62)j(cid:64) := V (cid:62)j(cid:64)+1;
i i
and total ordering is assured.
This algorithm has higher latency than thesequencer-based multicast algorithm:
three messages are sent serially between the sender and the group before a message can
be delivered.
Note that the total ordering chosen by this algorithm is not also guaranteed to be
causally or FIFO-ordered: any two messages are delivered in an essentially arbitrary
total order, influenced by communication delays.
For other approaches to implementing total ordering, see Melliar-Smith et al.
[1990], Garcia-Molina and Spauster [1991] and Hadzilacos and Toueg [1994].
Implementingcausalordering • Next we give an algorithm for non-overlapping closed
groups based on that developed by Birman et al. [1991], shown in Figure 15.15, in which
the causally ordered multicast operations are CO-multicast and CO-deliver. The
algorithm takes account of the happened-before relationship only as it is established by
multicast messages. If the processes send one-to-one messages to one another, then
these will not be accounted for.
Each process p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N) maintains its own vector timestamp (see
i
Section 14.4). The entries in the timestamp count the number of multicast messages
from each process that happened-before the next message to be multicast.
To CO-multicast a message to group g, the process adds 1 to its entry in the
timestamp and B-multicasts the message along with its timestamp to g.
When a process p B-delivers a message from p , it must place it in the hold-back
i j
queue before it can CO-deliver it – that is, until it is assured that it has delivered any
messages that causally preceded it. To establish this, p waits until (a) it has delivered
i
any earlier message sent by p , and (b) it has delivered any message that p had
j j
delivered at the time it multicast the message. Both of those conditions can be detected
by examining vector timestamps, as shown in Figure 15.15. Note that a process can
immediately CO-deliver to itself any message that it CO-multicasts, although this is not
described in Figure 15.15.


===== page 676 =====
658 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Each process updates its vector timestamp upon delivering any message, to
maintain the count of causally precedent messages. It does this by incrementing the jth
entry in its timestamp by one. This is an optimization of the merge operation that appears
in the rules for updating vector clocks in Section 14.4. We can make the optimization in
view of the delivery condition in the algorithm of Figure 15.15, which guarantees that
only the jth entry will increase.
We outline the proof of the correctness of this algorithm as follows. Suppose that
multicast(g,m) (cid:111) multicast(g, m(cid:99)). Let V and V(cid:99) be the vector timestamps of mand
m(cid:99), respectively. It is straightforward to prove inductively from the algorithm that
V(cid:31)V(cid:99). In particular, if process p multicast m, then V(cid:62)k(cid:64)(cid:100)V(cid:99)(cid:62)k(cid:64).
k
Consider what happens when somecorrect process p B-delivers m(cid:99) (as opposed
i
toCO-delivering it) without first CO-delivering m. By the algorithm, V (cid:62)k(cid:64) can increase
i
only when p delivers a message from p , when it increases by 1. But p has not
i k i
received m, and therefore V (cid:62)k(cid:64) cannot increase beyond V(cid:62)k(cid:64)–1. It is therefore not
i
possible for p to CO-deliver m(cid:99), since this would require that V (cid:62)k(cid:64)(cid:116)V(cid:99)(cid:62)k(cid:64), and
i i
therefore that V (cid:62)k(cid:64)(cid:116)V(cid:62)k(cid:64).
i
The reader should check that if we substitute the reliable R-multicast primitive in
place of B-multicast, then we obtain a multicast that is both reliable and causally
ordered.
Furthermore, if we combine the protocolfor causal multicast with the sequencer-
based protocol for totally ordered delivery, then we obtain message delivery that is both
total and causal. The sequencer delivers messages according to the causal order and
multicasts the sequence numbers for the messages in the order in which it receives them.
The processes in the destination group do not deliver a message until they have received
anorder message from the sequencer and the message is next in the delivery sequence.
Since the sequencer delivers messages in causal order, and since all other
processes deliver messages in the same order as the sequencer, the ordering is indeed
both total and causal.
Overlappinggroups • We have considered only non-overlapping groups in the
preceding definitions and algorithms for FIFO, total and causal ordering semantics. This
simplifies the problem, but it is not satisfactory, since in general processes need to be
members of multiple overlapping groups. For example, a process may be interested in
events from multiple sources and thus join a corresponding set of event-distribution
groups.
We can extend the ordering definitions to global orders [Hadzilacos and Toueg
1994], in which we have to consider that if message m is multicast to g, and if message
m(cid:99) is multicast to g(cid:99), then both messages are addressed to the members of g(cid:136)g(cid:99):
Global FIFO ordering: If a correct process issues multicast(g,m) and then
multicast(g(cid:99), m(cid:99)), then every correct process in g(cid:136)g(cid:99) that delivers m(cid:99) will deliver
m before m(cid:99).
Global causal ordering: If multicast(g,m) (cid:111) multicast(g(cid:99), m(cid:99)), where (cid:111) is
the happened-before relation induced by any chain of multicast messages, then any
correct process in g(cid:136)g(cid:99) that delivers m(cid:99) will deliver m before m(cid:99).


===== page 677 =====
SECTION 15.5 CONSENSUS AND RELATED PROBLEMS 659
Pairwise total ordering: If a correct process delivers message m sent to g before it
delivers m(cid:99) sent to g(cid:99), then any other correct process in g(cid:136)g(cid:99) that delivers m(cid:99) will
deliver m before m(cid:99).
Global total ordering: Let ‘<’ be the relation of ordering between delivery events.
We require that ‘<’ obeys pairwise total ordering and that it is acyclic – under
pairwise total ordering, ‘<’ is not acyclic by default.
One way of implementing these orders would be to multicast each message m to the
group of all processes in the system. Each process either discards or delivers the
message according to whether it belongs to group(m). This would be an inefficient and
unsatisfactory implementation: a multicast should involve as few processes as possible
beyond the members of the destination group. Alternatives are explored in Birman et al.
[1991], Garcia-Molina and Spauster [1991], Hadzilacos and Toueg [1994], Kindberg
[1995] and Rodrigues et al. [1998].
Multicastinsynchronousandasynchronoussystems • In this section, we have described
algorithms for reliable unordered multicast, (reliable) FIFO-ordered multicast, (reliable)
causally ordered multicast and totally ordered multicast. We also indicated how to
achieve a multicast that is both totally and causally ordered. We leave the reader to
devise an algorithm for a multicast primitive that guarantees both FIFO and total
ordering. All the algorithms that we have described work correctly in asynchronous
systems.
We did not, however, give an algorithm that guarantees both reliable and totally
ordered delivery. Surprising though it may seem, while possible in a synchronous
system, a protocol with these guarantees is impossible in an asynchronous distributed
system – even one that has at worst suffered a single process crash failure. We return to
this point in the next section.
15.5 Consensus and related problems
This section introduces the problem of consensus [Pease et al. 1980, Lamport et al.
1982] and the related problems of Byzantine generals and interactive consistency. We
refer to these collectively as problems of agreement. Roughly speaking, the problem is
for processes to agree on a value after one or more of the processes has proposed what
that value should be.
For example, in Chapter 2 we described a situation in which two armies should
decide consistently to attack the common enemy or retreat. Similarly, we may require
that all the correct processes controlling a spaceship’s engines should decide to either
‘proceed’ or ‘abort’ after each has proposed one action or the other, and in a transaction
to transfer funds from one account to another the processes involved must consistently
agree to perform the respective debit and credit. In mutual exclusion, the processes agree
on which process can enter the critical section. In an election, the processes agree on
which is the elected process. In totally ordered multicast, the processes agree on the
order of message delivery.
Protocols exist that are tailored to these individual types of agreement. We
described some of them above, and Chapters 16 and 17 examine transactions. But it is


===== page 678 =====
660 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
useful for us to consider more general forms of agreement, in a search for common
characteristics and solutions.
This section defines consensus more precisely and relates it to three related
agreement problems: Byzantine generals, interactive consistency and totally ordered
multicast. We go on to examine under what circumstances the problems can be solved,
and to sketch some solutions. In particular, we discuss the well-known impossibility
result of Fischer et al. [1985], which states that in an asynchronous system a collection
of processes containing only one faulty process cannot be guaranteed to reach
consensus. Finally, we consider how it is that practical algorithms exist despite the
impossibility result.
15.5.1 System model and problem definitions
Our system model includes a collection of processes p (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N) communicat-
i
ing by message passing. An important requirement that applies in many practical situa-
tions is for consensus to be reached even in the presenceof faults. We assume, as before,
that communication is reliable but that processes may fail. In this section we consider
Byzantine (arbitrary) process failures, as well as crash failures. We sometimes specify
an assumption that up to some number f of the N processes are faulty – that is, they ex-
hibit some specified types of fault; the remainderof the processes are correct.
If arbitrary failures can occur, then another factor in specifying our system is
whether the processes digitally sign the messages that they send (see Section 11.4). If
processes sign their messages, then a faulty process is limited in the harm it can do.
Specifically, during an agreement algorithm it cannot make a false claim about the
values that a correct process has sent to it. The relevance of message signing will
become clearer when we discuss solutions to the Byzantine generals problem. By
default, we assume that signing does not take place.
Definitionoftheconsensusproblem • To reach consensus, every process p begins in
i
the undecided state and proposes a single value v , drawn from a set D
i
(i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N). The processes communicate with one another, exchanging values.
Each process then sets the value of a decision variable, d . In doing so it enters the
i
decided state, in which it may no longer change d (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N). Figure 15.16
i
shows three processes engaged in a consensus algorithm. Two processes propose
‘proceed’ and a third proposes ‘abort’ but then crashes. The two processes that remain
correct each decide ‘proceed’.
The requirements of a consensus algorithm are that the following conditions
should hold for every execution of it:
Termination: Eventually each correct process sets its decision variable.
Agreement: The decision value of all correct processes is the same: if p and p are
i j
correct and have entered the decided state, then d = d (i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N).
i j
Integrity: If the correct processes all proposed the same value, then any correct
process in the decided state has chosen that value.
Variations on the definition of integrity may be appropriate, according to the
application. For example, a weaker type of integrity would be for the decision value to


===== page 679 =====
SECTION 15.5 CONSENSUS AND RELATED PROBLEMS 661
Figure 15.16 Consensus for three processes
d1:=proceed d2:=proceed
P1 P2
v1=proceed v2=proceed
Consensus algorithm
v3=abort
P3 (crashes)
equal a value that some correct process proposed – not necessarily all of them. We use
the definition above except where stated otherwise. Integrity is also known as validity in
the literature.
To help in understanding how the formulation of the problem translates into an
algorithm,consider a system in which processes cannot fail. It is then straightforward to
solve consensus. For example, we can collect the processes into a group and have each
process reliably multicast its proposed value to the members of the group. Each process
waits until it has collected all N values (including its own). It then evaluates the function
majority(cid:11)v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12), which returns the value that occurs most often among its
1 2 N
arguments, or the special value (cid:65)(cid:144)D if no majority exists. Termination is guaranteed
by the reliability of the multicast operation. Agreement and integrity are guaranteed by
the definition of majority and the integrity property of a reliable multicast. Every process
receives the same set of proposed values, and every process evaluates the same function
of those values. So they must all agree, and if every process proposed the same value,
then they all decide on this value.
Note that majority is only one possible function that the processes could use to
agree upon a value from the candidate values. For example, if the values are ordered,
then the functions minimum and maximum may be appropriate.
If processes can crash this introduces the complication of detecting failures, and it
is not immediately clear that a run of the consensus algorithm can terminate. In fact, if
the system is asynchronous, then it may not; we shall return to this point shortly.
If processes can fail in arbitrary (Byzantine) ways, then faulty processes can in
principle communicate random values to the others. This may seem unlikely in practice,
but it is not beyond the bounds of possibility for a process with a bug to fail in this way.
Moreover, the fault may not be accidental, but the result of mischievous or malevolent
operation. Someone could deliberately make a process send different values to different
peers in an attempt to thwart the others, which are trying to reach consensus. In case of
inconsistency, correct processes must compare what they have received with what other
processes claim to have received.


===== page 680 =====
662 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
TheByzantinegeneralsproblem • In the informal statement of the Byzantine generals
problem [Lamport et al. 1982], three or more generals are to agree to attack or to retreat.
One, the commander, issues the order. The others, lieutenants to the commander, must
decide whether to attack or retreat. But one or more of the generals may be ‘treacherous’
– that is, faulty. If the commander is treacherous, he proposes attacking to one general
and retreating to another. If a lieutenant is treacherous, he tells one of his peers that the
commander told him to attack and another that they are to retreat.
The Byzantine generals problem differs from consensus in that a distinguished
process supplies a value that the others are to agree upon, instead of each of them
proposing a value. The requirements are:
Termination: Eventually each correct process sets its decision variable.
Agreement: The decision value of all correct processes is the same: if p and p are
i j
correct and have entered the decided state, then d = d (i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N).
i j
Integrity: If the commander is correct, then all correct processes decide on the value
that the commander proposed.
Note that, for the Byzantine generals problem, integrity implies agreement when the
commander is correct; but the commander need not be correct.
Interactiveconsistency • The interactive consistency problem is another variant of
consensus, in which every process proposes a single value. The goal of the algorithm is
for the correct processes to agree on a vector of values, one for each process. We call
this the ‘decision vector’. For example, the goal could be for each of a set of processes
to obtain the same information about their respective states.
The requirements for interactive consistency are:
Termination: Eventually each correct process sets its decision variable.
Agreement: The decision vector of all correct processes is the same.
Integrity: If p is correct, then all correct processes decide on v as the ith
i i
component of their vector.
Relatingconsensustootherproblems • Although it is common to consider the
Byzantine generals problem with arbitrary process failures, in fact each of the three
problems – consensus, Byzantine generals and interactive consistency – is meaningful
in the context of either arbitrary or crash failures. Similarly, each can be framed
assuming either a synchronous or an asynchronous system.
It is sometimes possible to derive a solution to one problem using a solution to
another. This is a very useful property, both because it increases our understanding of
the problems and because by reusing solutions we can potentially save on
implementation effort and complexity.
Suppose that there exist solutions to consensus (C), Byzantine generals (BG) and
interactive consistency (IC) as follows:
C (cid:11)v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12) returns the decision value of p in a run of the solution to the
i 1 2 N i
consensus problem, where v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v are the values that the processes proposed.
1 2 N
BG (cid:11)j(cid:15)v(cid:12) returns the decision value of p in a run of the solution to the Byzantine
i i
generals problem, where p , the commander, proposes the value v.
j


===== page 681 =====
SECTION 15.5 CONSENSUS AND RELATED PROBLEMS 663
IC (cid:11)v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12)(cid:62)j(cid:64) returns the jth value in the decision vector of p in a run of the
i 1 2 N i
solution to the interactive consistency problem, where v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v are the values
1 2 N
that the processes proposed.
The definitions of C , BG and IC assume that a faulty process proposes a single
i i i
notional value, even though it may have given different proposed values to each of the
other processes. This is only a convenience: the solutions will not rely on any such
notional value.
It is possible to construct solutions out of the solutions to other problems. We give
three examples:
IC from BG: We construct a solution to IC from BG by running BG N times, once
with each process p (i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N) acting as the commander:
i
IC (cid:11)v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12)(cid:62)j(cid:64) = BG (cid:11)j(cid:15)v (cid:12) (i(cid:15)j = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N)
i 1 2 N i j
C from IC: For the case where a majority of processes are correct, we construct a
solution to C from IC by running IC to produce a vector of values at each process,
then applying an appropriate function on the vector’s values to derive a single value:
C (cid:11)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12) = majority(cid:11)IC (cid:11)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12)(cid:62)1(cid:64)(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)IC (cid:11)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12)(cid:62)N(cid:64)(cid:12)
i 1 N i 1 N i 1 N
where i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:125)N and majority is as defined above.
BG from C: We construct a solution to BG from C as follows:
(cid:129) The commander p sends its proposed value v to itself and each of the
j
remaining processes.
(cid:129) All processes run C with the values v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v that they receive (p may be
1 2 N j
faulty).
(cid:129) They derive BG (cid:11)j(cid:15)v(cid:12) = C (cid:11)v (cid:15)v (cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)v (cid:12) (i = 1(cid:15)2(cid:15)(cid:125)(cid:15)N).
i i 1 2 N
The reader should check that the termination, agreement and integrity conditions are
preserved in each case. Fischer [1983] relates the three problems in more detail.
In systems with crash failures, consensus is equivalent to solving reliable and
totally ordered multicast: given a solution to one, we can solve the other. Implementing
consensus with a reliable and totally ordered multicast operation RTO-multicast is
straightforward. We collect all the processes into a group, g. To achieve consensus, each
process p performs RTO-multicast(g, v ). Then each process p chooses d = m ,
i i i i i
where m is the first value that p RTO-delivers. The termination property follows from
i i
the reliability of the multicast.The agreement and integrity properties follow from the
reliability and total ordering of multicast delivery. Chandra and Toueg [1996]
demonstrate how reliable and totally ordered multicast can be derived from consensus.
15.5.2 Consensus in a synchronous system
This section describes an algorithm to solve consensus in a synchronous system,
although it is based on a modified form of the integrity requirement. The algorithm uses
only a basic multicast protocol. It assumes that up to f of the N processes exhibit crash
failures.


===== page 682 =====
664 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.17 Consensus in a synchronous system
Algorithm for process p (cid:143)g; algorithm proceeds in f+1 rounds
i
On initialization
1 0
Values := (cid:94)v (cid:96); Values = {};
i i i
In round r (1(cid:100)r(cid:100)f+1)
r r–1
B-multicast(g, Values –Values ); // Send only values that have not been sent
i i
r+1 r
Values := Values ;
i i
while (in round r)
{
On B-deliver(V ) from some p
j j
r+1 r+1
Values := Values (cid:137)V ;
i i j
}
After (cid:11)f+1(cid:12) rounds
f+1
Assign d = minimum(cid:11)Values (cid:12);
i i
To reach consensus, each correct process collects proposed values from the other
processes. The algorithm proceeds in f+1 rounds, in each of which the correct
processesB-multicast the values between themselves. At most f processes may crash, by
assumption. At worst, all f crashes will occur during the rounds, but the algorithm
guarantees that at the end of the rounds all the correct processes that have survived will
be in a position to agree.
The algorithm, shown in Figure 15.17, is based on that by Dolev and Strong
[1983] and its presentation by Attiya and Welch [1998]. Their modified form of the
integrity requirement applies to the proposed values of all processes, not just the correct
ones: if all processes, whether correct or not, proposed the same value, then any correct
process in the decided state would chose that value. Given that the algorithm assumes
crash failures at worst, the proposed values of correct and non-correct processes would
not be expected to differ, at least not on the basis of failures. The revised form of
integrity enables the convenient use of the minimum function to choose a decision value
from those proposed.
r
The variable Values holds the set of proposed values known to process p at the
i i
beginning of round r. Each process multicasts the set of values that it has not sent in
previous rounds. It then takes delivery of similar multicast messages from other
processes and records any new values. Although this is not shown in Figure 15.17, the
duration of a round is limited by setting a timeout based on the maximum time for a
correct process to multicast a message. After f+1 rounds, each process chooses the
minimum value it has received as its decision value.
Termination is obvious from the fact that the system is synchronous. To check the
correctness of the algorithm, we must show that each process arrives at the same set of
values at the end of the final round. Agreement and integrity (in its modified form) will
then follow, because the processes apply the minimum function to this set.


===== page 683 =====
SECTION 15.5 CONSENSUS AND RELATED PROBLEMS 665
Assume, to the contrary, that two processes differ in their final set of values.
Without loss of generality, some correct process p possesses a value v that another
i
correct process p (i(cid:122)j) does not possess. The only explanation for p possessing a
j i
proposed value v at the end that p does not possess is that any third process, p , say,
j k
that managed to send v to p crashed before v could be delivered to p . In turn, any
i j
process sending v in the previous round must have crashed, to explain why p possesses
k
v in that round but p did not receive it. Proceeding in this way, we have to posit at least
j
one crash in each of the preceding rounds.Butwe have assumed that at most f crashes
can occur, and there are f+1 rounds. We have arrived at a contradiction.
It turns out that any algorithm to reach consensus despite up to f crash failures
requires at least f+1 rounds of message exchanges, no matter how it is constructed
[Dolev and Strong 1983]. This lower bound also applies in the case of Byzantine failures
[Fischerand Lynch 1982].
15.5.3 The Byzantine generals problem in a synchronous system
Now we discuss the Byzantine generals problem in a synchronous system. Unlike the
algorithm for consensus described in the previous section, here we assume that
processes can exhibit arbitrary failures. That is, a faulty process may send any message
with any value at any time; and it may omit to send any message. Up to f of the N
processes may be faulty. Correct processes can detect the absence of a message through
a timeout; but they cannot conclude that the sender has crashed, since it may be silent
for some time and then send messages again.
We assume that the communication channels between pairs of processes are
private. If a process could examine all the messages that other processes sent, then it
could detect the inconsistencies in what a faulty process sends to different processes.
Our default assumption of channel reliability means that no faulty process can inject
messages into the communication channel between correct processes.
Lamport et al. [1982] considered the case of three processes that send unsigned
messages to one another. They showed that there is no solution that guarantees to meet
the conditions of the Byzantine generals problem if one process is allowed to fail. They
generalized this result to show that no solution exists if N(cid:148)3f. We shall demonstrate
these results shortly. They went on to give an algorithm that solves the Byzantine
generals problem in a synchronous system if N(cid:116)3f+1, for unsigned (they call them
‘oral’) messages.
Impossibilitywiththreeprocesses • Figure 15.18 shows two scenarios in which just one
of three processes is faulty. In the lefthand configuration one of the lieutenants, p , is
3
faulty; on the right the commander, p , is faulty. Each scenario in Figure 15.18 shows
1
two rounds of messages: the values the commander sends, and the values that the
lieutenants subsequently sendto each other. The numeric prefixes serve to specify the
sources of messages and to show the different rounds. Read the ‘:’ symbol in messages
as ‘says’; for example, ‘3:1:u’ is the message ‘3 says 1 says u’.
In the lefthand scenario, the commandercorrectly sends the same value v to each
of the other two processes, and p correctly echoes this to p . However, p sends a
2 3 3
value u(cid:122)v to p . All p knows at this stage is that it hasreceived differing values; it
2 2
cannot tell which were sent out by the commander.


===== page 684 =====
666 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
Figure 15.18 Three Byzantine generals
p1(Commander) p1(Commander)
1:v 1:v 1:w 1:x
2:1:v 2:1:w
p2 p3 p2 p3
3:1:u 3:1:x
Faulty processes are shown in grey
In the righthand scenario, the commander is faulty and sends differing values to
the lieutenants. After p has correctly echoed the value x that it received, p is in the
3 2
same situation as it was in when p was faulty: it has received two differing values.
3
If a solution exists, then process p is bound to decide on value v when the
2
commander is correct, by the integrity condition. If we accept that no algorithm can
possibly distinguish between the two scenarios, p must also choose the value sent by
2
the commander in the righthand scenario.
Following exactly the same reasoning for p , assuming that it is correct, we are
3
forced to conclude (by symmetry) that p also chooses the value sent by the commander
3
as its decision value. But this contradicts the agreement condition(the commander sends
differing values if it is faulty). So no solution is possible.
Note that this argument rests on our intuition that nothing can be done to improve
a correct general’s knowledge beyond the first stage, where it cannot tell which process
is faulty. It is possible to prove the correctness of this intuition [Pease et al. 1980].
Byzantine agreement can be reached for three generals, with one of them faulty, if the
generals digitally sign their messages.
ImpossibilitywithN(cid:100)3f • Pease et al. generalized the basic impossibility result for
three processes, to prove that no solution is possible if N(cid:148)3f. In outline, the argument
is as follows. Assume that a solution exists with N(cid:148)3f. Let each of three processes p ,
1
p and p use the solution to simulate the behaviour of n , n and n generals,
2 3 1 2 3
respectively, where n +n +n = N and n (cid:15)n (cid:15)n (cid:100)N/3. Assume, furthermore, that
1 2 3 1 2 3
one of the three processes is faulty. Those of p , p and p that are correct simulate
1 2 3
correct generals: they simulate the interactions of their own generals internally and send
messages from their generals to those simulated by other processes. The faulty process’s
simulated generals are faulty: the messages that it sends as part of the simulation to the
other two processes may be spurious. Since N(cid:100)3f and n (cid:15)n (cid:15)n (cid:100)N/3, at most f
1 2 3
simulated generals are faulty.
Because the algorithm that the processes run is assumed to be correct, the
simulation terminates. The correct simulated generals (in the two correct processes)
agree and satisfy the integrity property. But now we have a means for the two correct
processes out of the three to reach consensus: each decides on the value chosen by all of
their simulated generals. This contradicts our impossibility result for three processes,
with one faulty.


===== page 685 =====
SECTION 15.5 CONSENSUS AND RELATED PROBLEMS 667
Figure 15.19 Four Byzantine generals
p1(Commander) p1(Commander)
1:v 1:v 1:u 1:w
1:v 1:v
2:1:v 2:1:u
p2 3:1:u p3 p2 3:1:w p3
4:1:v 4:1:v 4:1:v 4:1:v
2:1:v 3:1:w 2:1:u 3:1:w
p4 p4
Faulty processes are shown in grey
Solutionwithonefaultyprocess • There is not sufficient space to describe fully the
algorithm of Pease et al. that solves the Byzantine generals problem in a synchronous
system with N(cid:116)3f+1. Instead, we give the operation of the algorithm for the case
N(cid:116)4, f = 1 and illustrate it for N = 4, f = 1.
The correct generals reach agreement in two rounds of messages:
(cid:129) In the first round, the commander sends a value to each of the lieutenants.
(cid:129) In the second round, each of the lieutenants sends the value it received to its peers.
A lieutenant receives a value from the commander, plus N–2 values from its peers. If
the commander is faulty, then all the lieutenants are correct and each will have gathered
exactly the set of values that the commander sent out. Otherwise, one of the lieutenants
is faulty; each of its correct peers receives N–2 copies of the value that the commander
sent, plus a value that the faulty lieutenant sent to it.
In either case, the correct lieutenants need only apply a simple majority function
to the set of values they receive. Since N(cid:149)4, (cid:11)N–2(cid:12)(cid:149)2. Therefore, the majority
function will ignore any value that a faulty lieutenant sent, and it will produce the value
thatthe commander sent if the commander is correct.
We now illustrate the algorithm that we have just outlined for the case of four
generals.Figure 15.19 shows two scenarios similar to those in Figure 15.18, but in this
case there are four processes, one of which is faulty. As in Figure 15.18, in the lefthand
configuration one of the lieutenants, p , is faulty; on the right, the commander, p , is
3 1
faulty.
In the lefthand case, the two correct lieutenant processes agree, deciding on the
commander's value:
p decides on majority(cid:11)v(cid:15)u(cid:15)v(cid:12) = v
2
p decides on majority(cid:11)v(cid:15)v(cid:15)w(cid:12) = v
4
In the righthand case the commander is faulty, but the three correct processes agree:
p , p and p decide on majority(cid:11)u(cid:15)v(cid:15)w(cid:12) = (cid:65) (the special value (cid:65) applies
2 3 4
where no majority of values exists).


===== page 686 =====
668 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
The algorithm takes account of the fact that a faulty process may omit to send a message.
If a correct process does not receive a message within a suitable time limit (the system
is synchronous), it proceeds as though the faulty process had sent it the value (cid:65).
Discussion • We can measure the efficiency of a solution to the Byzantine generals
problem – or any other agreement problem – by asking:
(cid:129) How many message rounds does it take? (This is a factor in how long it takes for
the algorithm to terminate.)
(cid:129) How many messages are sent, and of what size? (This measures the total
bandwidth utilization and has an impact on the execution time.)
In the general case (f(cid:116)1) the Lamport et al. [1982] algorithm for unsigned messages
operates over f+1 rounds. In each round, a process sends to a subset of the other
processes the values that it received in the previous round. The algorithm is very costly:
f+1
it involves sending O(cid:11)N (cid:12) messages.
Fischer and Lynch [1982] proved that any deterministic solution to consensus
assuming Byzantine failures (and hence to the Byzantine generals problem, as Section
15.5.1 showed) will take at least f+1 message rounds. So no algorithm can operate
faster in this respect than that of Lamport et al. But there have been improvements in the
message complexity, for example Garay and Moses [1993].
Several algorithms, such as that of Dolev and Strong [1983], take advantage of
signed messages. Dolev and Strong’s algorithm again takes f+1 rounds, but the
2
number of messages sent is only O(cid:11)N (cid:12).
The complexity and cost of the solutions suggest that they are applicable only
where the threat is great. Solutions that are based on more detailed knowledge of the
fault model may be more efficient [Barborak et al. 1993]. If malicious users are the
source of the threat, then a system to counter them is likely to use digital signatures; a
solution without signatures is impractical.
15.5.4 Impossibility in asynchronous systems
We have provided solutions to consensus and the Byzantine generals problem (and
hence, by derivation, to interactive consistency). However, all these solutions relied
upon the system being synchronous. The algorithms assume that message exchanges
take place in rounds, and that processes are entitled to time out and assume that a faulty
process has not sent them a message within the round, because the maximum delay has
been exceeded.
Fischer et al. [1985] proved that no algorithm can guarantee to reach consensus in
an asynchronous system, even with one process crash failure. In an asynchronous
system, processes can respond to messages at arbitrary times, so a crashed process is
indistinguishable from a slow one. Their proof, which is beyond the scope of this book,
involves showing that there is always some continuation of the processes’ execution that
avoids consensus being reached.
We immediately know from the result of Fischer et al. that there is no guaranteed
solution in an asynchronous system to the Byzantine generals problem, to interactive
consistency or to totally ordered and reliable multicast. If there were such a solution


===== page 687 =====
SECTION 15.5 CONSENSUS AND RELATED PROBLEMS 669
then, by the results of Section 15.5.1, we would have a solution to consensus –
contradicting the impossibility result.
Note the word ‘guarantee’ in the statement of the impossibility result. The result
does not mean that processes can never reach distributed consensus in an asynchronous
system if one is faulty. It allows that consensus can be reached with some probability
greater than zero, confirming what we know in practice. For example, despite the fact
that our systems are often effectively asynchronous, transaction systems have been
reaching consensus regularly for many years.
One approach to working around the impossibility result is to consider partially
synchronous systems, which are sufficiently weaker than synchronous systems to be
useful as models of practical systems, and sufficiently stronger than asynchronous
systems for consensus to be solvable in them [Dwork et al. 1988]. That approach is
beyond the scope of this book. However, we shall now outline three other techniques for
working around the impossibility result: fault masking, and reaching consensus by
exploiting failure detectors and by randomizing aspects of the processes’ behaviour.
Maskingfaults • The first technique is to avoid the impossibility result altogether by
masking any process failures that occur (see Section 2.4.2 for an introduction to fault
masking). For example, transaction systems employ persistent storage, which survives
crash failures. If a process crashes, then it is restarted (automatically, or by an
administrator). The process places sufficient information in persistent storage at critical
points in its program so that if it should crash and be restarted, it will find sufficient data
to be able to continue correctly with its interrupted task. In other words, it will behave
like a process that is correct, but that sometimes takes a long time to perform a
processing step.
Of course, fault masking is generally applicable in system design. Chapter 16
discusses how transactional systems take advantage of persistent storage. Chapter 18
describes how process failures can also be masked by replicating software components.
Consensususingfailuredetectors • Another method for circumventing the
impossibility result is to employ failure detectors. Some practical systems employ
‘perfect by design’ failure detectors to reach consensus. No failure detector in an
asynchronous system that works solely by message passing can really be perfect.
However, processes can agree to deem a process that has not responded for more than a
bounded time to have failed. An unresponsive process may not really have failed, but
the remaining processes act as if it had done. They make the failure ‘fail-silent’ by
discarding any subsequent messages that they do in fact receive from a ‘failed’ process.
In other words, we have effectively turned an asynchronous system into a synchronous
one. This technique is used in the ISIS system [Birman 1993].
This method relies upon the failure detector usually being accurate. When it is
inaccurate, then the system has to proceed without a group member that otherwise could
potentially have contributed to the system’s effectiveness. Unfortunately, making the
failure detector reasonably accurate involves using long timeout values, forcing
processes to wait a relatively long time (and not perform useful work) before concluding
that a process has failed. Another issue that arises for this approach is network
partitioning, which we discuss in Chapter 18.
A quite different approach is to use imperfect failure detectors, and to reach
consensus while allowing suspected processes to behave correctly instead of excluding


===== page 688 =====
670 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
them. Chandra and Toueg [1996] analyzed the properties that a failure detector must
have in order to solve the consensus problem in an asynchronous system. They showed
that consensus can be solved in an asynchronous system, even with an unreliable failure
detector, if fewer than N(cid:101)2 processes crash and communication is reliable. The weakest
type of failure detector for which this is so is called an eventuallyweak failure detector.
This is one that is both:
Eventually weakly complete: Each faulty process is eventually suspected
permanently by some correct process.
Eventually weakly accurate: After some point in time, at least one correct process is
never suspected by any correct process.
Chandra and Toueg show that we cannot implement an eventually weak failure detector
in an asynchronous system by message passing alone. However, we described a
message-based failure detector in Section 15.1 that adapts its timeout values according
to observed response times. If a process or the connection to it is very slow, then the
timeout value will grow so that cases of falsely suspecting a process become rare. In the
case of many real systems, this algorithm behaves sufficiently closely to an eventually
weak failure detector for practical purposes.
Chandra and Toueg’s consensus algorithm allows falsely suspected processes to
continue their normal operations and allows processes that have suspected them to
receive messages from them and process those messages normally. This makes the
application programmer’s life complicated, but it has the advantage that correct
processes are not wasted by being falsely excluded. Moreover, timeouts for detecting
failures can be set less conservatively than with the ISIS approach.
Consensususingrandomization • The result of Fischer et al. [1985] depends on what
we can consider to be an ‘adversary’. This is a ‘character’ (actually, just a collection of
random events) who can exploit the phenomena of asynchronous systems so as to foil
the processes’ attempts to reach consensus. The adversary manipulates the network to
delay messages so that they arrive at just the wrong time, and similarly it slows down or
speeds up the processes just enough so that they are in the ‘wrong’ state when they
receive a message.
The third technique that addresses the impossibility result is to introduce an
element of chance in the processes’ behaviour, so that the adversary cannot exercise its
thwarting strategy effectively. Consensus might still not be reached in some cases, but
this method enables processes to reach consensus in a finite expected time. A
probabilistic algorithm that solves consensus even with Byzantine failures can be found
in Canetti and Rabin [1993].


===== page 689 =====
SECTION 15.6 SUMMARY 671
15.6 Summary
We began this chapter by discussing the need for processes to access shared resources
under conditions of mutual exclusion. Locks are not always implemented by the servers
that manage the shared resources, and a separate distributed mutual exclusion service is
then required. Three algorithms were considered that achieve mutual exclusion: one
employing a central server, a ring-based algorithm and a multicast-based algorithm
using logical clocks. None of these mechanisms can withstand failure as we described
them, although they can be modified to tolerate some faults.
Next we explored elections, considering a ring-based algorithm and the bully
algorithm, whose common aim is to elect a process uniquely from a given set – even if
several elections take place concurrently. The bully algorithm could be used, for
example, to elect a new master time server, or a new lock server, when the previous one
fails.
The following section described coordination and agreement in group
communication. It discussed reliable multicast, in which the correct processes agree on
the set of messages to be delivered, and multicast with FIFO, causal and total delivery
ordering. We gave algorithms for reliable multicast and for all three types of delivery
ordering.
Finally, we described the three problems of consensus, Byzantine generals and
interactive consistency. We defined the conditions for their solution and we showed
relationships between these problems – including the relationship between consensus
and reliable, totally ordered multicast.
Solutions exist in a synchronous system, and we described some of them. In fact,
solutionsexist even when arbitrary failures are possible.We outlined part of the solution
to the Byzantine generals problem of Lamport et al. [1982]. More recent algorithms
have lower complexity, but in principle none can better the f+1 rounds taken by this
algorithm, unless messages are digitally signed.
The chapter ended by describing the fundamental result of Fischer et al. [1982]
concerning the impossibility of guaranteeing consensus in an asynchronous system. We
discussed how it is that, nonetheless, systems regularly do reach agreement in
asynchronous systems.
EXERCISES
15.1 Is it possible to implement either a reliable or an unreliable (process) failure detector
using an unreliable communication channel? page 632
15.2 If all client processes are single-threaded, is mutual exclusion condition ME3, which
specifies entry in happened-before order, relevant? page 635
15.3 Give a formula for the maximum throughput of a mutual exclusion system in terms of
the synchronization delay. page 635
15.4 In the central server algorithm for mutual exclusion, describe a situation in which two
requests are not processed in happened-before order. page 636


===== page 690 =====
672 CHAPTER 15 COORDINATION AND AGREEMENT
15.5 Adapt the central server algorithm for mutual exclusion to handle the crash failure of any
client (in any state), assuming that the server is correct and given a reliable failure
detector. Comment on whether the resultant system is fault-tolerant. What would
happen if a client that possesses the token is wrongly suspected to have failed? page
636
15.6 Give an example execution of the ring-based algorithm to show that processes are not
necessarily granted entry to the critical section in happened-before order. page 637
15.7 In a certain system, each process typically uses a critical section many times before
another process requires it. Explain why Ricart and Agrawala’s multicast-based mutual
exclusion algorithm is inefficient for this case, and describe how to improve its
performance. Does your adaptation satisfy liveness condition ME2? page 639
15.8 In the bully algorithm, a recovering process starts an election and will become the new
coordinator if it has a higher identifier than the current incumbent. Is this a necessary
feature of the algorithm? page 644
15.9 Suggest how to adapt the bully algorithm to deal with temporary network partitions
(slow communication) and slow processes. page 646
15.10 Devise a protocol for basic multicast over IP multicast. page 647
15.11 How, if at all, should the definitions of integrity, agreement and validity for reliable
multicast change for the case of open groups? page 647
15.12 Explain why reversing the order of the lines ‘R-deliver m’ and ‘if (q(cid:122)p) then B-
multicast(g, m); end if’ in Figure 15.9 makes the algorithm no longer satisfy uniform
agreement. Does the reliable multicast algorithm based on IP multicast satisfy uniform
agreement? page 648
15.13 Explain whether the algorithm for reliable multicast over IP multicast works for open as
well as closed groups. Given any algorithm for closed groups, how, simply, can we
derive an algorithm for open groups? page 649
15.14 Explain how to adapt the algorithm for reliable multicast over IP multicast to eliminate
the hold-back queue – so that a received message that is not a duplicate can be delivered
immediately, but without any ordering guarantees. Hint: use sets of sequence numbers
to represent the messages that have been delivered so far. page 649
15.15 Consider how to address the impractical assumptions we made in order to meet the
validity and agreement properties for the reliable multicast protocol based on IP
multicast. Hint: add a rule for deleting retained messages when they have been delivered
everywhere, and consider adding a dummy ‘heartbeat’ message, which is never
delivered to the application, but which the protocol sends if the application has no
message to send. page 649
15.16 Show that the FIFO-ordered multicast algorithm does not work for overlapping groups,
by considering two messages sent from the same source to two overlapping groups, and
considering a process in the intersection of those groups. Adapt the protocol to work for
this case. Hint: processes should include with their messages the latest sequence
numbers of messages sent to all groups. page 654


===== page 691 =====
EXERCISES 673
15.17 Show that, if the basic multicast that we use in the algorithm of Figure 15.13 is also
FIFO-ordered, then the resultant totally-ordered multicast is also causally ordered. Is it
the case that any multicast that is both FIFO-ordered and totally ordered is thereby
causally ordered? page 655
15.18 Suggest how to adapt the causally ordered multicast protocol to handle overlapping
groups. page 657
15.19 In discussing Maekawa’s mutual exclusion algorithm, we gave an example of three
subsets of a set of three processes that could lead to a deadlock. Use these subsets as
multicast groups to show how a pairwise total ordering is not necessarily acyclic.
page 658
15.20 Construct a solution to reliable, totally ordered multicast in a synchronous system, using
a reliable multicast and a solution to the consensus problem. page 659
15.21 We gave a solution to consensus from a solution to reliable and totally ordered multicast,
which involved selecting the first value to be delivered. Explain from first principles
why, in an asynchronous system, we could not instead derive a solution by using a
reliable but not totally ordered multicast service and the ‘majority’ function. (Note that,
if we could, this would contradict the impossibility result of Fischer et al. [1985]!) Hint:
consider slow/failed processes. page 663
15.22 Consider the algorithm given in Figure 15.17 for consensus in a synchronous system,
which uses the following integrity definition: if all processes, whether correct or not,
proposed the same value, then any correct process in the decided state would chose that
value. Now consider an application in which correct processes may propose different
results, e.g., by running different algorithms to decide which action to take in a control
system’s operation. Suggest an appropriate modification to the integrity definition and
thus to the algorithm. page 664
15.23 Show that Byzantine agreement can be reached for three generals, with one of them
faulty, if the generals digitally sign their messages. page 665


===== page 692 =====  [ocr]
This page intentionally left blank


===== page 693 =====
16
TRANSACTIONS AND
CONCURRENCY CONTROL
16.1 Introduction
16.2 Transactions
16.3 Nested transactions
16.4 Locks
16.5 Optimistic concurrency control
16.6 Timestamp ordering
16.7 Comparison of methods for concurrency control
16.8 Summary
This chapter discusses the application of transactions and concurrency control to shared
objects managed by servers.
A transaction defines a sequence of server operations that is guaranteed by the
server to be atomic in the presence of multiple clients and server crashes. Nested
transactions are structured from sets of other transactions. They are particularly useful in
distributed systems because they allow additional concurrency.
All of the concurrency control protocols are based on the criterion of serial
equivalence and are derived from rules for conflicts between operations. Three methods
are described:
• Locks are used to order transactions that access the same objects according to the
order of arrival of their operations at the objects.
• Optimistic concurrency control allows transactions to proceed until they are ready
to commit, whereupon a check is made to see whether they have performed
conflicting operations on objects.
• Timestamp ordering uses timestamps to order transactions that access the same
objects according to their starting times.
675


===== page 694 =====
676 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
16.1 Introduction
The goal of transactions is to ensure that all of the objects managed by a server remain
in a consistent state when they are accessed by multiple transactions and in the presence
of server crashes. Chapter 2 introduced a failure model for distributed systems.
Transactions deal with crash failures of processes and omission failures in
communication, but not any type of arbitrary (or Byzantine) behaviour. The failure
model for transactions is presented in Section 16.1.2.
Objects that can be recovered after their server crashes are called recoverable
objects. In general, the objects managed by a server may be stored in volatile memory
(for example, RAM) or persistent memory (for example, a hard disk). Even if objects
are stored in volatile memory, the server may use persistent memory to store sufficient
information for the state of the objects to be recovered if the server process crashes. This
enables servers to make objects recoverable. A transaction is specified by a client as a
set of operations on objects to be performed as an indivisible unit by the servers
managing those objects. The servers must guarantee that either the entire transaction is
carried out and the results recorded in permanent storage or, in the case that one or more
of them crashes, its effects are completely erased. The next chapter discusses issues
related to transactions that involve several servers, in particular how they decide on the
outcome of a distributed transaction. This chapter concentrates on the issues for a
transaction at a single server. A client’s transaction is also regarded as indivisible from
the point of view of other clients’ transactions in the sense that the operations of one
transaction cannot observe the partial effects of the operations of another. Section 16.1.1
discusses simple synchronization of access to objects, and Section 16.2 introduces
transactions, which require more advanced techniques to prevent interference between
clients. Section 16.3 discusses nested transactions. Sections 16.4 to 16.6 discuss three
methods of concurrency control for transactions whose operations are all addressed to a
single server (locks, optimistic concurrency control and timestamp ordering). Chapter
17 discusses how these methods are extended for use with transactions whose operations
are addressed to several servers.
To explain some of the points made in this chapter, we use a banking example,
shown in Figure 16.1. Each account is represented by a remote object whose interface,
Account, provides operations for making deposits and withdrawals and for enquiring
about and setting the balance. Each branch of the bank is represented by a remote object
whose interface, Branch, provides operations for creating a new account, for looking up
an account by name and for enquiring about the total funds at that branch.
16.1.1 Simple synchronization (without transactions)
One of the main issues of this chapter is that unless a server is carefully designed, its
operations performed on behalf of different clients may sometimes interfere with one
another. Such interference may result in incorrect values in the objects. In this section,
we discuss how client operations may be synchronized without recourse to transactions.
Atomicoperationsattheserver • We have seen in earlier chapters that the use of
multiple threads is beneficial to performance in many servers. We have also noted that
the use of threads allows operations from multiple clients to run concurrently and


===== page 695 =====
SECTION 16.1 INTRODUCTION 677
Figure 16.1 Operations of the Account interface
deposit(amount)
deposit amount in the account
withdraw(amount)
withdraw amount from the account
getBalance()(cid:111) amount
return the balance of the account
setBalance(amount)
set the balance of the account to amount
Operations of the Branch interface
create(name)(cid:111) account
create a new account with a given name
lookUp(name)(cid:111) account
return a reference to the account with the given name
branchTotal()(cid:111) amount
return the total of all the balances at the branch
possibly access the same objects. Therefore, the methods of objects should be designed
for use in a multi-threaded context. For example, if the methods deposit and withdraw
are not designed for use in a multi-threaded program, then it is possible that the actions
of two or more concurrent executions of the method could be interleaved arbitrarily and
have strange effects on the instance variables of the account objects.
Chapter 7 explains the use of the synchronized keyword, which can be applied to
methods in Java to ensure that only one thread at a time can access an object. In our
example, the class that implements the Account interface will be able to declare the
methods as synchronized. For example:
public synchronized void deposit(int amount) throws RemoteException{
// adds amount to the balance of the account
}
If one thread invokes a synchronized method on an object, then that object is effectively
locked, and another thread that invokes one of its synchronized methods will be blocked
until the lock is released. This form of synchronization forces the execution of threads
to be separated in time and ensures that the instance variables of a single object are
accessed in a consistent manner. Without synchronization, two separate deposit
invocations might read the balance before either has incremented it – resulting in an
incorrect value. Any method that accesses an instance variable that can vary should be
synchronized.
Operations that are free from interference from concurrent operations being
performed in other threads are called atomic operations. The use of synchronized


===== page 696 =====
678 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
methods in Java is one way of achieving atomic operations. But in other programming
environments for multi-threaded servers the operations on objects still need to have
atomic operations in order to keep their objects consistent. This may be achieved by the
use of any available mutual exclusion mechanism, such as a mutex.
Enhancing client cooperation by synchronization of server operations • Clients may use
a server as a means of sharing some resources. This is achieved by some clients using
operations to update the server’s objects and other clients using operations to access
them. The above scheme for synchronized access to objects provides all that is required
in many applications – it prevents threads interfering with one another. However, some
applications require a way for threads to communicate with each other.
For example, a situation may arise in which the operation requested by one client
cannot be completed until an operation requested by another client has been performed.
This can happen when some clients are producers and others are consumers – the
consumers may have to wait until a producer has supplied some more of the commodity
in question. It can also occur when clients are sharing a resource – clients needing the
resource may have to wait for other clients to release it. We shall see later in this chapter
that a similar situation arises when locks or timestamps are used for concurrency control
in transactions.
The Java wait and notify methods introduced in Chapter 7 allow threads to
communicate with one another in a manner that solves the above problems. They must
be used within synchronized methods of an object. A thread calls wait on an object so
as to suspend itself and to allow another thread to execute a method of that object. A
thread calls notify to inform any thread waiting on that object that it has changed some
of its data. Access to an object is still atomic when threads wait for one another: a thread
that calls wait gives up its lock and suspends itself as a single atomic action; when a
thread is restarted after being notified it acquires a new lock on the object and resumes
execution from after its wait. A thread that calls notify (from within a synchronized
method) completes the execution of that method before releasing the lock on the object.
Consider the implementation of a shared Queue object with two methods: first
removes and returns the first object in the queue, and append adds a given object to the
end of the queue. The method first will test whether the queue is empty, in which case
it will call wait on the queue. If a client invokes first when the queue is empty, it will not
get a reply until another client has added something to the queue – the append operation
will call notify when it has added an object to the queue. This allows one of the threads
waiting on the queue object to resume and to return the first object in the queue to its
client. When threads can synchronize their actions on an object by means of wait and
notify, the server holds onto requests that cannot immediately be satisfied and the client
waits for a reply until another client has produced whatever it needs.
In Section 16.4, we discuss the implementation of a lock as an object with
synchronized operations. When clients attempt to acquire a lock, they can be made to
wait until the lock is released by other clients.
Without the ability to synchronize threads in this way, a client that cannot be
satisfied immediately – for example, a client that invokes the first method on an empty
queue – is told to try again later. This is unsatisfactory, because it will involve the client
in polling the server and the server in carrying out extra requests. It is also potentially
unfair because other clients may make their requests before the waiting client tries again.


===== page 697 =====
SECTION 16.2 TRANSACTIONS 679
16.1.2 Failure model for transactions
Lampson [1981] proposed a fault model for distributed transactions that accounts for
failures of disks, servers and communication. In this model, the claim is that the
algorithms work correctly in the presence of predictable faults, but no claims are made
about their behaviour when a disaster occurs. Although errors may occur, they can be
detected and dealt with before any incorrect behaviour results. The model states the
following:
(cid:129) Writes to permanent storage may fail, either by writing nothing or by writing a
wrong value – for example, writing to the wrong block is a disaster. File storage
may also decay. Reads from permanent storage can detect (by a checksum) when
a block of data is bad.
(cid:129) Servers may crash occasionally. When a crashed server is replaced by a new
process, its volatile memory is first set to a state in which it knows none of the
values (for example, of objects) from before the crash. After that it carries out a
recovery procedure using information in permanent storage and obtained from
other processes to set the values of objects including those related to the two-phase
commit protocol (see Section 17.6). When a processor is faulty, it is made to crash
so that it is prevented from sending erroneous messages and from writing wrong
values to permanent storage – that is, so it cannot produce arbitrary failures.
Crashes can occur at any time; in particular, they may occur during recovery.
(cid:129) There may be an arbitrary delay before a message arrives. A message may be lost,
duplicated or corrupted. The recipient can detect corrupted messages using a
checksum. Both forged messages and undetected corrupt messages are regarded
as disasters.
The fault model for permanent storage, processors and communications was used to
design a stable system whose components can survive any single fault and present a
simple failure model. In particular, stable storage provided an atomic write operation in
the presence of a single fault of the write operation or a crash failure of the process. This
was achieved by replicating each block on two disk blocks. A write operation was
applied to the pair of disk blocks, and in the case of a single fault, one good block was
always available. A stable processor used stable storage to enable it to recover its
objects after a crash. Communication errors were masked by using a reliable remote
procedure calling mechanism.
16.2 Transactions
In some situations, clients require a sequence of separate requests to a server to be
atomic in the sense that:
1. They are free from interference by operations being performed on behalf of other
concurrent clients.
2. Either all of the operations must be completed successfully or they must have no
effect at all in the presence of server crashes.


===== page 698 =====
680 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.2 A client’s banking transaction
Transaction T:
a.withdraw(100);
b.deposit(100);
c.withdraw(200);
b.deposit(200);
We return to our banking example to illustrate transactions. A client that performs a
sequence of operations on a particular bank account on behalf of a user will first lookUp
the account by name and then apply the deposit, withdraw and getBalance operations
directly to the relevant account. In our examples, we use accounts with names A,B and
C. The client looks them up and stores references to them in variables a,b and c of type
Account. The details of looking up the accounts by name and the declarations of the
variables are omitted from the examples.
Figure 16.2 shows an example of a simple client transaction specifying a series of
related actions involving the bank accounts A, B and C. The first two actions transfer
$100 from A to B and the second two transfer $200 from C to B. A client achieves a
transfer operation by doing a withdrawal followed by a deposit.
Transactions originate from database management systems. In that context, a
transaction is an execution of a program that accesses a database. Transactions were
introduced to distributed systems in the form of transactional file servers such as XDFS
[Mitchell and Dion 1982]. In the context of a transactional file server, a transaction is an
execution of a sequence of client requests for file operations. Transactions on distributed
objects were provided in several research systems, including Argus [Liskov 1988] and
Arjuna [Shrivastava et al. 1991]. In this last context, a transaction consists of the
execution of a sequence of client requests such as, for example, those in Figure 16.2.
From the client’s point of view, a transaction is a sequence of operations that forms a
single step, transforming the server data from one consistent state to another.
Transactions can be provided as a part of middleware. For example, CORBA
provides the specification for an Object Transaction Service [OMG 2003] with IDL
interfaces allowing clients’ transactions to include multiple objects at multiple servers.
The client is provided with operations to specify the beginning and end of a transaction.
The client maintains a context for each transaction, which it propagates with each
operation in that transaction. In CORBA, transactional objects are invoked within the
scope of a transaction and generally have some persistent store associated with them.
In all of these contexts, a transaction applies to recoverable objects and is intended
to be atomic. It is often called an atomic transaction. There are two aspects to atomicity:
All or nothing: A transaction either completes successfully, in which case the effects
of all of its operations are recorded in the objects, or (if it fails or is deliberately
aborted) has no effect at all. This all-or-nothing effect has two further aspects of its
own:
Failure atomicity: The effects are atomic even when the server crashes.


===== page 699 =====
SECTION 16.2 TRANSACTIONS 681
Durability: After a transaction has completed successfully, all its effects are
saved in permanent storage. We use the term ‘permanent storage’ to refer to files
held on disk or another permanent medium. Data saved in a file will survive if the
server process crashes.
Isolation: Each transaction must be performed without interference from other
transactions; in other words, the intermediate effects of a transaction must not be
visible to other transactions. The box below introduces a mnemonic, ACID, for
remembering the properties of atomic transactions.
To support the requirement for failure atomicity and durability, the objects must be
recoverable; that is, when a server process crashes unexpectedly due to a hardware fault
or a software error, the changes due to all completed transactions must be available in
permanent storage so that when the server is replaced by a new process, it can recover
the objects to reflect the all-or-nothing effect. By the time a server acknowledges the
completion of a client’s transaction, all of the transaction’s changes to the objects must
have been recorded in permanent storage.
A server that supports transactions must synchronize the operations sufficiently to
ensure that the isolation requirement is met. One way of doing this is to perform the
transactions serially – one at a time, in some arbitrary order. Unfortunately, this solution
would generally be unacceptable for servers whose resources are shared by multiple
interactive users. For instance, in our banking example it is desirable to allow several
bank clerks to perform online banking transactions at the same time as one another.
The aim for any server that supports transactions is to maximize concurrency.
Therefore transactions are allowed to execute concurrently if this would have the same
effect as a serial execution – that is, if they are serially equivalent or serializable.
ACID properties
Härder and Reuter [1983] suggested the mnemonic ‘ACID’ to remember the
properties of transactions, which are as follows:
Atomicity: a transaction must be all or nothing;
Consistency: a transaction takes the system from one consistent state to another
consistent state;
Isolation;
Durability.
We have not included ‘consistency’ in our list of the properties of transactions
because it is generally the responsibility of the programmers of servers and clients to
ensure that transactions leave the database consistent.
As an example of consistency, suppose that in the banking example, an object
holds the sum of all the account balances and its value is used as the result of
branchTotal. Clients can get the sum of all the account balances either by using
branchTotal or by calling getBalance on each of the accounts. For consistency, they
should get the same result from both methods. To maintain this consistency, the
deposit and withdraw operations must update the object holding the sum of all the
account balances.


===== page 700 =====
682 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.3 Operations in the Coordinator interface
openTransaction() (cid:111) trans;
Starts a new transaction and delivers a unique TID trans. This identifier will be used
in the other operations in the transaction.
closeTransaction(trans)(cid:111) (commit, abort);
Ends a transaction: a commit return value indicates that the transaction has
committed; an abort return value indicates that it has aborted.
abortTransaction(trans);
Aborts the transaction.
Transaction capabilities can be added to servers of recoverable objects. Each
transaction is created and managed by a coordinator, which implements the Coordinator
interface shown in Figure 16.3. The coordinator gives each transaction an identifier, or
TID. The client invokes the openTransaction method of the coordinator to introduce a
new transaction – a transaction identifier or TID is allocated and returned. At the end of
a transaction, the client invokes the closeTransaction method to indicate its end – all of
the recoverable objects accessed by the transaction should be saved. If, for some reason,
the client wants to abort a transaction, it invokes the abortTransaction method – all of
its effects should be removed from sight.
A transaction is achieved by cooperation between a client program, some
recoverable objects and a coordinator. The client specifies the sequence of invocations
on recoverable objects that are to comprise a transaction. To achieve this, the client
sends with each invocation the transaction identifier returned by openTransaction. One
way to make this possible is to include an extra argument in each operation of a
recoverable object to carry the TID. For example, in the banking service the deposit
operation might be defined:
deposit(trans, amount)
Deposits amount in the account for transaction with TID trans
When transactions are provided as middleware, the TID can be passed implicitly
with all remote invocations between openTransaction and closeTransaction or
abortTransaction. This is what the CORBA Transaction Service does. We shall not
show TIDs in our examples.
Normally, a transaction completes when the client makes a closeTransaction
request. If the transaction has progressed normally, the reply states that the transaction
iscommitted – this constitutes a promise to the client that all of the changes requested in
the transaction are permanently recorded and that any future transactions that access the
same data will see the results of all of the changes made during the transaction.
Alternatively, the transaction may have to abort for one of several reasons related
to the nature of the transaction itself, to conflicts with another transaction or to the
crashing of a process or computer. When a transaction is aborted the parties involved
(the recoverable objects and the coordinator) must ensure that none of its effects are
visible to future transactions, either in the objects or in their copies in permanent storage.
A transaction is either successful or is aborted in one of two ways – the client
aborts it (using an abortTransaction call to the server) or the server aborts it. Figure 16.4


===== page 701 =====
SECTION 16.2 TRANSACTIONS 683
Figure 16.4 Transaction life histories
Successful Aborted by client Aborted by server
openTransaction openTransaction openTransaction
operation operation operation
operation operation operation
(cid:129) (cid:129) server aborts (cid:129)
(cid:129) (cid:129) transaction (cid:111) (cid:129)
operation operation operation ERROR (cid:3)
reported to client
closeTransaction abortTransaction
shows these three alternative life histories for transactions. We refer to a transaction as
failing in both of the latter cases.
Serviceactionsrelatedtoprocess crashes • If a server process crashes unexpectedly, it
is eventually replaced. The new server process aborts any uncommitted transactions and
uses a recovery procedure to restore the values of the objects to the values produced by
the most recently committed transaction. To deal with a client that crashes unexpectedly
during a transaction, servers can give each transaction an expiry time and abort any
transaction that has not completed before its expiry time.
Clientactionsrelatedtoserver process crashes • If a server crashes while a transaction
is in progress, the client will become aware of this when one of the operations returns an
exception after a timeout. If a server crashes and is then replaced during the progress of
a transaction, the transaction will no longer be valid and the client must be informed via
an exception to the next operation. In either case, the client must then formulate a plan,
possibly in consultation with the human user, for the completion or abandonment of the
task of which the transaction was a part.
16.2.1 Concurrency control
This section illustrates two well-known problems of concurrent transactions in the
context of the banking example – the ‘lost update’ problem and the ‘inconsistent
retrievals’ problem. We then show how both of these problems can be avoided by using
serially equivalent executions of transactions. We assume throughout that each of the
operations deposit,withdraw,getBalance and setBalance is a synchronized operation –
that is, that its effects on the instance variable that records the balance of an account are
atomic.
The lostupdateproblem • The lost update problem is illustrated by the following pair
of transactions on bank accounts A,B and C, whose initial balances are $100, $200 and
$300, respectively. Transaction T transfers an amount from account A to account B.
Transaction U transfers an amount from account C to account B. In both cases, the


===== page 702 =====
684 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.5 The lost update problem
Transaction T: Transaction U:
balance = b.getBalance(); balance = b.getBalance();
b.setBalance(balance*1.1); b.setBalance(balance*1.1);
a.withdraw(balance/10) c.withdraw(balance/10)
balance = b.getBalance(); $200
balance = b.getBalance(); $200
b.setBalance(balance*1.1); $220
b.setBalance(balance*1.1); $220
a.withdraw(balance/10) $80
c.withdraw(balance/10) $280
amount transferred is calculated to increase the balance of B by 10%. The net effects on
account B of executing the transactions T and U should be to increase the balance of
accountB by 10% twice, so its final value is $242.
Now consider the effects of allowing the transactions T and U to run concurrently,
as in Figure 16.5. Both transactions get the balance of Bas $200 and then deposit $20.
The result is incorrect, increasing the balance of account B by $20 instead of $42. This
is an illustration of the ‘lost update’ problem. U’s update is lost because T overwrites it
without seeing it. Both transactions have read the old value before either writes the new
value.
In Figure 16.5 onwards, we show the operations that affect the balance of an
account on successive lines down the page, and the reader should assume that an
operation on a particular line is executed at a later time than the one on the line above it.
Inconsistentretrievals • Figure 16.6 shows another example related to a bank account
in which transaction Vtransfers a sum from account A to B and transaction W invokes
thebranchTotal method to obtain the sum of the balances of all the accounts in the bank.
Figure 16.6 The inconsistent retrievals problem
Transaction V: Transaction W:
a.withdraw(100) aBranch.branchTotal()
b.deposit(100)
a.withdraw(100); $100
total = a.getBalance( ) $100
total = total + b.getBalance() $300
total = total + c.getBalance()
b.deposit(100) $300 (cid:129)
(cid:129)


===== page 703 =====
SECTION 16.2 TRANSACTIONS 685
Figure 16.7 A serially equivalent interleaving of T and U
Transaction T: Transaction U:
balance = b.getBalance() balance = b.getBalance()
b.setBalance(balance*1.1) b.setBalance(balance*1.1)
a.withdraw(balance/10) c.withdraw(balance/10)
balance = b.getBalance() $200
b.setBalance(balance*1.1) $220
balance = b.getBalance() $220
b.setBalance(balance*1.1) $242
a.withdraw(balance/10) $80
c.withdraw(balance/10) $278
The balances of the two bank accounts, A and B, are both initially $200. The result of
branchTotal includes the sum of A and B as $300, which is wrong. This is an illustration
of the ‘inconsistent retrievals’ problem. W’s retrievals are inconsistent because V has
performed only the withdrawal part of a transfer at the time the sum is calculated.
Serialequivalence • If each of several transactions is known to have the correct effect
when it is done on its own, then we can infer that if these transactions are done one at a
time in some order the combined effect will also be correct. An interleaving of the
operations of transactions in which the combined effect is the same as if the transactions
had been performed one at a time in some order is a serially equivalent interleaving.
When we say that two different transactions have the same effect as one another, we
mean that the read operations return the same values and that the instance variables of
the objects have the same values at the end.
The use of serial equivalence as a criterion for correct concurrent execution
prevents the occurrence of lost updates and inconsistent retrievals.
The lost update problem occurs when two transactions read the old value of a
variable and then use it to calculate the new value. This cannot happen if one transaction
is performed before the other, because the later transaction will read the value written
by the earlier one. As a serially equivalent interleaving of two transactions produces the
same effect as a serial one, we can solve the lost update problem by means of serial
equivalence. Figure 16.7 shows one such interleaving in which the operations that affect
the shared account, B,are actually serial, for transaction T does all its operations on B
before transaction U does. Another interleaving of T and U that has this property is one
in which transaction U completes its operations on account B before transaction T starts.
We now consider the effect of serial equivalence in relation to the inconsistent
retrievals problem, in which transaction V is transferring a sum from account A to B and
transaction W is obtaining the sum of all the balances (see Figure 16.6). The inconsistent
retrievals problem can occur when a retrieval transaction runs concurrently with an
update transaction. It cannot occur if the retrieval transaction is performed before or
after the update transaction. A serially equivalent interleaving of a retrieval transaction
and an update transaction, for example as in Figure 16.8, will prevent inconsistent
retrievals occurring.


===== page 704 =====
686 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.8 A serially equivalent interleaving ofVandW
TransactionV: Transaction W:
a.withdraw(100); aBranch.branchTotal( )
b.deposit(100)
a.withdraw(100); $100
b.deposit(100) $300
total = a.getBalance( ) $100
total = total + b.getBalance() $400
total = total + c.getBalance()
...
Conflicting operations • When we say that a pair of operations conflicts we mean that
their combined effect depends on the order in which they are executed. To simplify
matters we consider a pair of operations, read and write. read accesses the value of an
object and write changes its value. The effect of an operation refers to the value of an
object set by a write operation and the result returned by a read operation. The conflict
rules for read and write operations are given in Figure 16.9.
For any pair of transactions, it is possible to determine the order of pairs of
conflicting operations on objects accessed by both of them. Serial equivalence can be
defined in terms of operation conflicts as follows:
For two transactions to be serially equivalent, it is necessary and sufficient that all
pairs of conflicting operations of the two transactions be executed in the same
order at all of the objects they both access.
Figure 16.9 Read and write operation conflict rules
Operations of different Conflict Reason
transactions
Because the effect of a pair of read operations does
read read No
not depend on the order in which they are executed
Because the effect of a read and a write operation
read write Yes
depends on the order of their execution
Because the effect of a pair of write operations
write write Yes
depends on the order of their execution


===== page 705 =====
SECTION 16.2 TRANSACTIONS 687
Figure 16.10 A non–serially-equivalent interleaving of operations of transactions T and U
Transaction T: TransactionU:
x = read(i)
write(i, 10)
y = read(j)
write(j, 30)
write(j, 20)
z = read (i)
Consider as an example the transactions T and U, defined as follows:
T: x = read(i);write(i, 10);write(j, 20);
U: y = read(j);write(j, 30); z = read (i);
Then consider the interleaving of their executions, shown in Figure 16.10. Note that
each transaction’s access to objects i and j is serialized with respect to one another,
becauseT makes all of its accesses to i before U does and U makes all of its accesses to
j before T does. But the ordering is not serially equivalent, because the pairs of
conflicting operations are not done in the same order at both objects. Serially equivalent
orderings require one of the following two conditions:
1. T accessesi before U and T accesses j before U.
2. U accesses i before T and U accesses j before T.
Serial equivalence is used as a criterion for the derivation of concurrency control
protocols. These protocols attempt to serialize transactions in their access to objects.
Three alternative approaches to concurrency control are commonly used: locking,
optimistic concurrency control and timestamp ordering. However, most practical
systems use locking, which is discussed in Section 16.4. When locking is used, the
server sets a lock, labelled with the transactionidentifier, on each object just before it is
accessed and removes these locks when the transaction has completed. While an object
is locked, only the transaction that it is locked for can access that object; other
transactions must either wait until the object is unlocked or, in some cases, share the
lock. The use of locks can lead to deadlocks, with transactions waiting for each other to
release locks – for example, when a pair of transactions each has an object locked that
the other needs to access. We discuss the deadlock problem and some remedies for it in
Section16.4.1.
Optimistic concurrency control is described in Section 16.5. In optimistic
schemes, a transaction proceeds until it asks to commit, and before it is allowed to
commit the server performs a check to discover whether it has performed operations on
any objects that conflict with the operations of other concurrent transactions, in which
case the server aborts it and the client may restart it. The aim of the check is to ensure
that all the objects are correct.
Timestamp ordering is described in Section 16.6. In timestamp ordering, a server
records the most recent time of reading and writing of each object and for each


===== page 706 =====
688 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.11 A dirty read when transaction T aborts
Transaction T: Transaction U:
a.getBalance() a.getBalance()
a.setBalance(balance + 10) a.setBalance(balance + 20)
balance = a.getBalance() $100
a.setBalance(balance + 10) $110
balance = a.getBalance() $110
a.setBalance(balance + 20) $130
commit transaction
abort transaction
operation, the timestamp of the transaction is compared with that of the object to
determine whether it can be done immediately or must be delayed or rejected. When an
operation is delayed, the transaction waits; when it is rejected, the transaction is aborted.
Basically, concurrency control can be achieved either by clients’ transactions
waiting for one another or by restarting transactions after conflicts between operations
have been detected, or by a combination of the two.
16.2.2 Recoverability from aborts
Servers must record all the effects of committed transactions and none of the effects of
aborted transactions. They must therefore allow for the fact that a transaction may abort
by preventing it affecting other concurrent transactions if it does so.
This section illustrates two problems associated with aborting transactions in the
context of the banking example. These problems are called ‘dirty reads’ and ‘premature
writes’, and both of them can occur in the presence of serially equivalent executions of
transactions. These issues are concerned with the effects of operations on objects such
as the balance of a bank account. To simplify things, operations are considered in two
categories: read operations and write operations. In our illustrations, getBalance is a
read operation and setBalance a write operation.
Dirtyreads • The isolation property of transactions requires that transactions do not see
the uncommitted state of other transactions. The ‘dirty read’ problem is caused by the
interaction between a read operation in one transaction and an earlier write operation in
another transaction on the same object. Consider the executions illustrated in Figure
16.11, in which T gets the balance of account A and sets it to $10 more, then U gets the
balance of account A and sets it to $20 more, and the two executions are serially
equivalent. Now suppose that the transaction T aborts after U has committed. Then the
transaction U will have seen a value that never existed, since A will be restored to its
original value. We say that the transaction U has performed a dirty read. As it has
committed, it cannot be undone.


===== page 707 =====
SECTION 16.2 TRANSACTIONS 689
Figure 16.12 Overwriting uncommitted values
Transaction T: Transaction U:
a.setBalance(105) a.setBalance(110)
$100
a.setBalance(105) $105
a.setBalance(110) $110
Recoverabilityoftransactions • If a transaction (like U) has committed after it has seen
the effects of a transaction that subsequently aborted, the situation is not recoverable. To
ensure that such situations will not arise, any transaction (like U) that is in danger of
having a dirty read delays its commit operation. The strategy for recoverability is to
delay commits until after the commitment of any other transaction whose uncommitted
state has been observed. In our example, U delays its commit until after T commits. In
the case that T aborts, then U must abort as well.
Cascadingaborts • InFigure 16.11, suppose that transaction U delays committing until
after T aborts. As we have said, U must abort as well. Unfortunately, if any other
transactions have seen the effects due to U, they too must be aborted. The aborting of
these latter transactions may cause still further transactions to be aborted. Such
situations are called cascading aborts. To avoid cascading aborts, transactions are only
allowed to read objects that were written by committed transactions. To ensure that this
is the case, any read operation must be delayed until other transactions that applied a
write operation to the same object have committed or aborted. The avoidance of
cascading aborts is a stronger condition than recoverability.
Prematurewrites • Consider another implication of the possibility that a transaction
may abort. This one is related to the interaction between write operations on the same
object belonging to different transactions. For an illustration, we consider two
setBalance transactions, T and U, on account A, as shown in Figure 16.12. Before the
transactions, the balance of account A was $100. The two executions are serially
equivalent, with T setting the balance to $105 and U setting it to $110. If the transaction
U aborts and T commits, the balance should be $105.
Some database systems implement the action of abort by restoring ‘before
images’ of all the writes of a transaction. In our example, A is $100 initially, which is
the ‘before image’ of T’swrite; similarly, $105 is the ‘before image’ of U’swrite. Thus
ifU aborts, we get the correct balance of $105.
Now consider the case when U commits and then T aborts. The balance should be
$110, but as the ‘before image’ of T’swrite is $100, we get the wrong balance of $100.
Similarly, if T aborts and then U aborts, the ‘before image’ of U’swrite is $105 and we
get the wrong balance of $105 – the balance should revert to $100.
To ensure correct results in a recovery scheme that uses before images, write
operations must be delayed until earlier transactions that updated the same objects have
either committed or aborted.


===== page 708 =====
690 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Strictexecutionsoftransactions • Generally, it is required that transactions delay both
their read and write operations so as to avoid both dirty reads and premature writes. The
executions of transactions are called strict if the service delays both read and write
operations on an object until all transactions that previously wrote that object have either
committed or aborted. The strict execution of transactions enforces the desired property
of isolation.
Tentativeversions • For a server of recoverable objects to participate in transactions, it
must be designed so that any updates of objects can be removed if and when a
transaction aborts. To make this possible, all of the update operations performed during
a transaction are done in tentative versions of objects in volatile memory. Each
transaction is provided with its own private set of tentative versions of any objects that
it has altered. All the update operations of a transaction store values in the transaction’s
own private set. Access operations in a transaction take values from the transaction’s
own private set if possible, or failing that, from the objects.
The tentative versions are transferred to the objects only when a transaction
commits, by which time they will also have been recorded in permanent storage. This is
performed in a single step, during which other transactions are excluded from access to
the objects that are being altered. When a transaction aborts, its tentative versions are
deleted.
16.3 Nested transactions
Nested transactions extend the above transaction model by allowing transactions to be
composed of other transactions. Thus several transactions may be started from within a
transaction, allowing transactions to be regarded as modules that can be composed as
required.
The outermost transaction in a set of nested transactions is called the top-level
transaction. Transactions other than the top-level transaction are called subtransactions.
For example, in Figure 16.13, T is a top-level transaction that starts a pair of
subtransactions, T and T . The subtransaction T starts its own pair of subtransactions,
1 2 1
T and T . Also, subtransaction T starts its own subtransaction, T , which starts
11 22 2 21
another subtransaction, T .
211
A subtransaction appears atomic to its parent with respect to transaction failures
and to concurrent access. Subtransactions at the same level, such as T 1 and T 2, can run
concurrently, but their access to common objects is serialized – for example, by the
locking scheme described in Section 16.4. Each subtransaction can fail independently of
its parent and of the other subtransactions. When a subtransaction aborts, the parent
transaction can sometimes choose an alternative subtransaction to complete its task. For
example, a transaction to deliver a mail message to a list of recipients could be structured
as a set of subtransactions, each of which delivers the message to one of the recipients.
If one or more of the subtransactions fails, the parent transaction could record the fact
and then commit, with the result that all the successful child transactions commit. It
could then start another transaction to attempt to redeliver the messages that were not
sent the first time.


===== page 709 =====
SECTION 16.3 NESTED TRANSACTIONS 691
Figure 16.13 Nested transactions
T : top-level transaction
T1 = openSubTransaction T2 = openSubTransaction
commit
T1 : T2:
openSubTransaction openSubTransaction openSubTransaction
provisional commit abort
T11 : T12 : T21 :
openSubTransaction
provisional commit provisional commit provisional commit
T211 :
provisional commit
When we need to distinguish our original form of transaction from nested ones,
we use the term flat transaction. It is flat because all of its work is done at the same level
between an openTransaction and a commit or abort, and it is not possible to commit or
abort parts of it. Nested transactions have the following main advantages:
1. Subtransactions at one level (and their descendants) may run concurrently with
other subtransactions at the same level in the hierarchy. This can allow additional
concurrency in a transaction. When subtransactions run in different servers, they
can work in parallel. For example, consider the branchTotal operation in our
banking example. It can be implemented by invoking getBalance at every account
in the branch. Now each of these invocations may be performed as a
subtransaction, in which case they can be performed concurrently. Since each one
applies to a different account, there will be no conflicting operations among the
subtransactions.
2. Subtransactions can commit or abort independently. In comparison with a single
transaction,a set of nested subtransactions is potentially more robust. The above
example of delivering mail shows that this is so – with a flat transaction, one
transaction failure would cause the whole transaction to be restarted. In fact, a
parent can decide on different actions according to whether a subtransaction has
aborted or not.
The rules for committing of nested transactions are rather subtle:
(cid:129) A transaction may commit or abort only after its child transactions have
completed.
(cid:129) When a subtransaction completes, it makes an independent decision either to
commit provisionally or to abort. Its decision to abort is final.
(cid:129) When a parent aborts, all of its subtransactions are aborted. For example, if T
2
aborts then T and T must also abort, even though they may have provisionally
21 211
committed.
(cid:129) When a subtransaction aborts, the parent can decide whether to abort or not. In our
example,T decides to commit although T has aborted.
2


===== page 710 =====
692 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
(cid:129) If the top-level transaction commits, then all of the subtransactions that have
provisionally committed can commit too, provided that none of their ancestors has
aborted. In our example, T’s commitment allows T ,T and T to commit, but
1 11 12
not T and T since their parent, T , aborted. Note that the effects of a
21 211 2
subtransaction are not permanent until the top-level transaction commits.
In some cases, the top-level transaction may decide to abort because one or more of its
subtransactions have aborted. As an example, consider the following Transfer
transaction:
Transfer $100 from B to A
a.deposit(100)
b.withdraw(100)
This can be structured as a pair of subtransactions, one for the withdraw operation and
the other for deposit. When the two subtransactions both commit, the Transfer
transaction can also commit. Suppose that a withdraw subtransaction aborts whenever
an account is overdrawn. Now consider the case when the withdraw subtransaction
aborts and the deposit subtransaction commits – and recall that the commitment of a
child transaction is conditional on the parent transaction committing. We presume that
the top-level (Transfer) transaction will decide to abort. The aborting of the parent
transaction causes the subtransactions to abort – so the deposit transaction is aborted and
all its effects are undone.
The CORBA Object Transaction Service supports both flat and nested
transactions. Nested transactions are particularly useful in distributed systems because
child transactions may be run concurrently in different servers. We return to this issue
in Chapter 17. This form of nested transactions is due to Moss [1985]. Other variants of
nested transactions with different serializability properties have been proposed; for
example, see Weikum [1991].
16.4 Locks
Transactions must be scheduled so that their effect on shared data is serially equivalent.
A server can achieve serial equivalence of transactions by serializing access to the
objects. Figure 16.7 shows an example of how serial equivalence can be achieved with
some degree of concurrency – transactions T and U both access account B, but T
completes its access before U starts accessing it.
A simple example of a serializing mechanism is the use of exclusive locks. In this
locking scheme, the server attempts to lock any object that is about to be used by any
operation of a client’s transaction. If a client requests access to an object that is already
locked due to another client’s transaction, the request is suspended and the client must
wait until the object is unlocked.
Figure 16.14 illustrates the use of exclusive locks. It shows the same transactions
as Figure 16.7, but with an extra column for each transaction showing the locking,
waiting and unlocking. In this example, it is assumed that when transactions T and U
start, the balances of the accounts A,B and C are not yet locked. When transaction T is
about to use account B, it is locked for T. When transaction U is about to use B it is still


===== page 711 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 693
Figure 16.14 Transactions T and U with exclusive locks
Transaction T: Transaction U:
balance = b.getBalance() balance = b.getBalance()
b.setBalance(bal*1.1) b.setBalance(bal*1.1)
a.withdraw(bal/10) c.withdraw(bal/10)
Operations Locks Operations Locks
openTransaction
bal = b.getBalance() lock B
b.setBalance(bal*1.1) openTransaction
a.withdraw(bal/10) lock A bal = b.getBalance() waits for T’s
lock on B
closeTransaction unlock A,B (cid:129) (cid:129) (cid:129)
lock B
b.setBalance(bal*1.1)
c.withdraw(bal/10) lock C
closeTransaction unlock B,C
locked for T, so transaction U waits. When transaction T is committed, B is unlocked,
whereupon transaction U is resumed. The use of the lock on B effectively serializes the
access to B. Note that if, for example, T released the lock on B between its getBalance
and setBalance operations, transaction U’s getBalance operation on B could be
interleaved between them.
Serial equivalence requires that all of a transaction’s accesses to a particular object
be serialized with respect to accesses by other transactions. All pairs of conflicting
operations of two transactions should be executed in the same order. To ensure this, a
transaction is not allowed any new locks after it has released a lock. The first phase of
each transaction is a ‘growing phase’, during which new locks are acquired. In the
second phase, the locks are released (a ‘shrinking phase’). This is called two-phase
locking.
We saw in Section 16.2.2 that because transactions may abort, strict executions
are needed to prevent dirty readsand premature writes. Under a strict execution regime,
a transaction that needs to read or write an object must be delayed until other
transactions that wrote the same object have committed or aborted. To enforce this rule,
any locks applied during the progress of a transaction are held until the transaction
commits or aborts. This is called strict two-phase locking. The presence of the locks
prevents other transactions reading or writing the objects. When a transaction commits,
to ensure recoverability, the locks must be held until all the objects it updated have been
written to permanent storage.
A server generally contains a large number of objects, and a typical transaction
accesses only a few of them and is unlikely to clash with other current transactions. The
granularity with which concurrency control can be applied to objects is an important


===== page 712 =====
694 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
issue, since the scope for concurrent access to objects in a server will be limited severely
if concurrency control (for example, locks) can only be applied to all the objects at once.
In our banking example, if locks were applied to all customer accounts at a branch, only
one bank clerk could perform an online banking transaction at any time – hardly an
acceptable constraint!
The portion of the objects to which access must be serialized should be as small
as possible; that is, just that part involved in each operation requested by transactions.
In our banking example, a branch holds a set of accounts, each of which has a balance.
Each banking operation affects one or more account balances – deposit and withdraw
affect one account balance, and branchTotal affects all of them.
The description of concurrency control schemes given below does not assume any
particular granularity. We discuss concurrency control protocols that are applicable to
objects whose operations can be modelled in terms of read and write operations on the
objects. For the protocols to work correctly, it is essential that each read and write
operation is atomic in its effects on objects.
Concurrency control protocols are designed to cope with conflicts between
operations in different transactions on the same object. In this chapter, we use the notion
of conflict between operations to explain the protocols. The conflict rules for read and
write operations are given in Figure 16.9, which shows that pairs of read operations
from different transactions on the same object do not conflict. Therefore, a simple
exclusive lock that is used for both read and write operations reduces concurrency more
than is necessary.
It is preferable to adopt a locking scheme that controls the access to each object so
that there can be several concurrent transactions reading an object, or a single
transaction writing an object, but not both. This is commonly referred to as a ‘many
readers/single writer’ scheme. Two types of locks are used: read locks and write locks.
Before a transaction’s read operation is performed, a read lock should be set on the
object. Before a transaction’s write operation is performed, a write lock should be set on
the object. Whenever it is impossible to set a lock immediately, the transaction (and the
client) must wait until it is possible to do so – a client’s request is never rejected.
As pairs of read operations from different transactions do not conflict, an attempt
to set a read lock on an object with a read lock is always successful. All the transactions
reading the same object share its read lock – for this reason, read locks are sometimes
called shared locks.
The operation conflict rules tell us that:
1. If a transaction T has already performed a read operation on a particular object,
then a concurrent transaction U must not write that object until T commits or
aborts.
2. If a transaction T has already performed a write operation on a particular object,
then a concurrent transaction U must not read or write that object until T commits
or aborts.
To enforce condition 1, a request for a write lock on an object is delayed by the presence
of a read lock belonging to another transaction. To enforce condition 2, a request for
either a read lock or a write lock on an object is delayed by the presence of a write lock
belonging to another transaction.


===== page 713 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 695
Figure 16.15 Lock compatibility
For one object Lock requested
read write
Lock already set none OK OK
read OK wait
write wait wait
Figure 16.15 shows the compatibility of read locks and write locks on any
particular object. The entries to the left of the first column in the table show the type of
lock already set, if any. The entries above the first row show the type of lock requested.
The entry in each cell shows the effect on a transaction that requests the type of lock
given above when the object has been locked in another transaction with the type of lock
on the left.
Inconsistent retrievals and lost updates are caused by conflicts between read
operations in one transaction and write operations in another without the protection of a
concurrency control scheme such as locking. Inconsistent retrievals are prevented by
performing the retrieval transaction before or after the update transaction. If the retrieval
transaction comes first, its read locks delay the update transaction. If it comes second,
its request for read locks causes it to be delayed until the update transaction has
completed.
Lost updates occur when two transactions read a value of an object and then use
it to calculate a new value. Lost updates are prevented by making later transactions delay
their reads until the earlier ones have completed. This is achieved by each transaction
setting a read lock when it reads an object and then promoting it to a write lock when it
writes the same object – when a subsequent transaction requires a read lock it will be
delayed until any current transaction has completed.
A transaction with a read lock that is shared with other transactions cannot
promote its read lock to a write lock, because the latter would conflict with the read locks
held by the other transactions. Therefore, such a transaction must request a write lock
and wait for the other read locks to be released.
Lock promotion refers to the conversion of a lock to a stronger lock – that is, a
lock that is more exclusive. The lock compatibility table in Figure 16.15 shows the
relative exclusivity of locks. The read lock allows other read locks, whereas the write
lock does not. Neither allows other write locks. Therefore, a write lock is more exclusive
than a read lock. Locks may be promoted because the result is a more exclusive lock. It
is not safe to demote a lock held by a transaction before it commits, because the result
will be more permissive than the previous one and may allow executions by other
transactions that are inconsistent with serial equivalence.
The rules for the use of locks in a strict two-phase locking implementation are
summarized in Figure 16.16. To ensure that these rules are adhered to, the client has no
access to operations for locking or unlocking items of data. Locking is performed when
the requests for read and write operations are about to be applied to the recoverable
objects, and unlocking is performed by the commit or abort operations of the transaction
coordinator.


===== page 714 =====
696 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.16 Use of locks in strict two-phase locking
1. When an operation accesses an object within a transaction:
(a)If the object is not already locked, it is locked and the operation proceeds.
(b)If the object has a conflicting lock set by another transaction, the transaction
must wait until it is unlocked.
(c)If the object has a non-conflicting lock set by another transaction, the lock is
shared and the operation proceeds.
(d)If the object has already been locked in the same transaction, the lock will be
promoted if necessary and the operation proceeds. (Where promotion is
prevented by a conflicting lock, rule b is used.)
2. When a transaction is committed or aborted, the server unlocks all objects it
locked for the transaction.
For example, the CORBA Concurrency Control Service [OMG 2000b] can be
used to apply concurrency control on behalf of transactions or to protect objects without
using transactions. It provides a means of associating a collection of locks (called a
lockset) with a resource such as a recoverable object. A lockset allows locks to be
acquired or released. A lockset’s lock method will acquire a lock or block until the lock
is free; other methods allow locks to be promoted or released. Transactional locksets
support the same methods as locksets, but their methods require transaction identifiers
as arguments. We mentioned earlier that the CORBA transaction service tags all client
requests in a transaction with the transaction identifier. This enables a suitable lock to
be acquired before each of the recoverable objects is accessed during a transaction. The
transaction coordinator is responsible for releasing the locks when a transaction
commits or aborts.
The rules given in Figure 16.16 ensure strictness, because the locks are held until
a transaction has either committed or aborted. However, it is not necessary to hold read
locks to ensure strictness. Read locks need only be held until the request to commit or
abort arrives.
Lockimplementation • The granting of locks will be implemented by a separate object
in the server that we call the lock manager. The lock manager holds a set of locks, for
example in a hash table. Each lock is an instance of the class Lock and is associated with
a particular object. The class Lock is shown in Figure 16.17. Each instance of Lock
maintains the following information in its instance variables:
(cid:129) the identifier of the locked object;
(cid:129) the transaction identifiers of the transactions that currently hold the lock (shared
locks can have several holders);
(cid:129) a lock type.


===== page 715 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 697
Figure 16.17 Lock class
public class Lock {
private Object object; // the object being protected by the lock
private Vector holders; // the TIDs of current holders
private LockType lockType; // the current type
public synchronized void acquire(TransID trans, LockType aLockType ){
while(/*another transaction holds the lock in conflicting mode*/) {
try {
wait();
}catch ( InterruptedException e){/*...*/ }
}
if (holders.isEmpty()) { // no TIDs hold lock
holders.addElement(trans);
lockType = aLockType;
} else if (/*another transaction holds the lock, share it*/ ) ){
if (/* this transaction not a holder*/) holders.addElement(trans);
} else if (/* this transaction is a holder but needs a more exclusive lock*/)
lockType.promote();
}
}
public synchronized void release(TransID trans ){
holders.removeElement(trans); // remove this holder
// set locktype to none
notifyAll();
}
}
The methods of Lock are synchronized so that the threads attempting to acquire or
release a lock will not interfere with one another. But, in addition, attempts to acquire
the lock use the waitmethod whenever they have to wait for another thread to release it.
Theacquire method carries out the rules given in Figure 16.15 and Figure 16.16.
Its arguments specify a transaction identifier and the type of lock required by that
transaction. It tests whether the request can be granted. If another transaction holds the
lock in a conflicting mode, it invokes wait, which causes the caller’s thread to be
suspended until a corresponding notify. Note that the wait is enclosed in a while, because
all waiters are notified and some of them may not be able to proceed. When, eventually,
the condition is satisfied, the remainder of the method sets the lock appropriately:
(cid:129) ifno other transaction holds the lock, just add the given transaction to the holders
and set the type;
(cid:129) else if another transaction holds the lock, share it by adding the given transaction
to the holders (unless it is already a holder);
(cid:129) else if this transaction is a holder but is requesting a more exclusive lock, promote
the lock.


===== page 716 =====
698 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.18 LockManager class
public class LockManager {
private Hashtable theLocks;
public void setLock(Object object, TransID trans, LockType lockType){
Lock foundLock;
synchronized(this){
// find the lock associated with object
// if there isn’t one, create it and add it to the hashtable
}
foundLock.acquire(trans, lockType);
}
// synchronize this one because we want to remove all entries
public synchronized void unLock(TransID trans) {
Enumeration e = theLocks.elements();
while(e.hasMoreElements()){
Lock aLock = (Lock)(e.nextElement());
if(/* trans is a holder of this lock*/ ) aLock.release(trans);
}
}
}
Therelease method’s arguments specify the transaction identifier of the transaction that
is releasing the lock. It removes the transaction identifier from the holders, sets the lock
type to none and calls notifyAll. The method notifies all waiting threads in case there are
multiple transactions waiting to acquire read locks – all of them may be able to proceed.
The class LockManager is shown in Figure 16.18. All requests to set locks and to release
them on behalf of transactions are sent to an instance of LockManager:
(cid:129) The setLock method’s arguments specify the object that the given transaction
wants to lock and the type of lock. It finds a lock for that object in its hashtable or,
if necessary, creates one. It then invokes the acquire method of that lock.
(cid:129) TheunLock method’s argument specifies the transaction that is releasing its locks.
It finds all of the locks in the hashtable that have the given transaction as a holder.
For each one, it calls the release method.
Some questions of policy: Note that when several threads wait on the same locked item,
the semantics of wait ensure that each transaction gets its turn. In the above program, the
conflict rules allow the holders of a lock to be either multiple readers or one writer. The
arrival of a request for a read lock is always granted unless the holder has a write lock.
The reader is invited to consider the following:
What is the consequence for write transactions in the presence of a steady trickle
of requests for read locks? Think of an alternative implementation.


===== page 717 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 699
When the holder has a write lock, several readers and writers may be waiting. The
reader should consider the effect of notifyAll and think of an alternative
implementation. If a holder of a read lock tries to promote the lock when the lock
is shared, it will be blocked. Is there any solution to this difficulty?
Locking rules for nested transactions • The aim of a locking scheme for nested
transactions is to serialize access to objects so that:
1. Each set of nested transactions is a single entity that must be prevented from
observing the partial effects of any other set of nested transactions.
2. Each transaction within a set of nested transactions must be prevented from
observing the partial effects of the other transactions in the set.
The first rule is enforced by arranging that every lock that is acquired by a successful
subtransaction is inherited by its parent when it completes. Inherited locks are also
inherited by ancestors. Note that this form of inheritance passes from child to parent!
The top-level transaction eventually inherits all of the locks that were acquired by
successful subtransactions at any depth in a nested transaction. This ensures that the
locks can be held until the top-level transaction has committed or aborted, which
prevents members of different sets of nested transactions observing one another’s partial
effects.
The second rule is enforced as follows:
(cid:129) Parent transactions are not allowed to run concurrently with their child
transactions. If a parent transaction has a lock on an object, it retains the lock
during the time that its child transaction is executing. This means that the child
transaction temporarily acquires the lock from its parent for its duration.
(cid:129) Subtransactions at the same level are allowed to run concurrently, so when they
access the same objects, the locking scheme must serialize their access.
The following rules describe lock acquisition and release:
(cid:129) For a subtransaction to acquire a read lock on an object, no other active transaction
can have a write lock on that object, and the only retainers of a write lock are its
ancestors.
(cid:129) For a subtransaction to acquire a write lock on an object, no other active
transaction can have a read or write lock on that object, and the only retainers of
read and write locks on that object are its ancestors.
(cid:129) When a subtransaction commits, its locks are inherited by its parent, allowing the
parent to retain the locks in the same mode as the child.
(cid:129) When a subtransaction aborts, its locks are discarded. If the parent already retains
the locks, it can continue to do so.
Note that subtransactions at the same level that access the same object will take turns to
acquire the locks retained by their parent. This ensures that their access to a common
object is serialized.
As an example, suppose that subtransactions T , T and T in Figure 16.13 all
1 2 11
access a common object, which is not accessed by the top-level transaction T. Suppose
that subtransaction T is the first to access the object and successfully acquires a lock,
1


===== page 718 =====
700 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.19 Deadlock with write locks
Transaction T Transaction U
Operations Locks Operations Locks
a.deposit(100); write lock A
b.deposit(200) write lock B
b.withdraw(100)
(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) waits for U’s a.withdraw(200); waits for T’s
lock on B (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) lock on A
(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)
(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)
which it passes on to T for the duration of its execution, getting it back when T
11 11
completes. When T completes its execution, the top-level transaction T inherits the
1
lock, which it retains until the set of nested transactions completes. The subtransaction
T can acquire the lock from T for the duration of its execution.
2
16.4.1 Deadlocks
The use of locks can lead to deadlock. Consider the use of locks shown in Figure 16.19.
Since the deposit and withdraw methods are atomic, we show them acquiring write locks
– although in practice they read the balance and then write it. Each of them acquires a
lock on one account and then gets blocked when it tries to access the account that the
other one has locked. This is a deadlock situation – two transactions are waiting, and
each is dependent on the other to release a lock so it can resume.
Deadlock is a particularly common situation when clients are involved in an
interactive program, for a transaction in an interactive program may last for a long
period of time. This can result in many objects being locked and remaining so, thus
preventing other clients using them.
Note that the locking of subitems in structured objects can be useful for avoiding
conflicts and possible deadlock situations. For example, a day in a diary could be
structured as a set of timeslots, each of which can be locked independently for updating.
Hierarchic locking schemes are useful if the application requires a different granularity
of locking for different operations, see Section 16.4.2.
Definition of deadlock • Deadlock is a state in which each member of a group of
transactions is waiting for some other member to release a lock. A wait-for graph can
be used to represent the waiting relationships between current transactions. In a wait-for
graph the nodes represent transactions and the edges represent wait-for relationships
between transactions – there is an edge from node T to node U when transaction T is
waiting for transaction U to release a lock. Figure 16.20 illustrates the wait-for graph
corresponding to the deadlock situation illustrated in Figure 16.19. Recall that the
deadlock arose because transactions T and U both attempted to acquire an object held by
the other. Therefore T waits for U and U waits for T. The dependency between


===== page 719 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 701
Figure 16.20 The wait-for graph for Figure 16.19
Held by Waits for
A
T U T U
B
Waits for
Held by
Figure 16.21 A cycle in a wait-for graph
U
T
V
transactions is indirect, via a dependency on objects. The diagram on the right shows the
objects held by and waited for by transactions T and U. As each transaction can wait for
only one object, the objects can be omitted from the wait-for graph – leaving the simple
graph on the left.
Suppose that, as in Figure 16.21, a wait-for graph contains a cycle T(cid:111)(cid:3)U(cid:3)(cid:111)(cid:3)…
(cid:111)(cid:3)V(cid:111)(cid:3)T . Each transaction is waiting for the nexttransaction in the cycle. All of these
transactions are blocked waiting for locks. None of the locks can ever be released, and
the transactions are deadlocked. If one of the transactions in a cycle is aborted, then its
locks are released and that cycle is broken. For example, if transaction T in Figure 16.21
is aborted, it will release alock on an object that V is waiting for – and V will no longer
be waiting for T.
Now consider a scenario in which the three transactions T,U and V share a read
lock on an object C, and transaction W holds a write lock on object B, on which
transaction V is waiting to obtain a lock (as shown on the right in Figure 16.22). The
transactions T and Wthen request write locks on object C, and a deadlock situation arises
in which T waits for U and V,V waits for W, and W waits for T,U and V, as shown on
the left in Figure 16.22. This shows that although each transaction can wait for only one
object at a time, it may be involved in several cycles. For example, transaction V is
involved in two cycles: V(cid:111)(cid:3)W(cid:3)(cid:111)(cid:3)T(cid:111)(cid:3)V and V(cid:111)(cid:3)W(cid:3)(cid:111)V.
In this example, suppose that transaction V is aborted. This will release V’s lock
onC and the two cycles involving V will be broken.
Deadlockprevention • One solution is to prevent deadlock. An apparently simple but
not very good way to overcome the deadlock problem is to lock all of the objects used
by a transaction when it starts. This would need to be done as a single atomic step so as


===== page 720 =====
702 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.22 Another wait-for graph
V Held by T W
T C Held by Held by
U
B
Held by
U
W V Waits for
to avoid deadlock at this stage. Such a transaction cannot run into deadlocks with other
transactions, but this approach unnecessarily restricts access to shared resources. In
addition, it is sometimes impossible to predict at the start of a transaction which objects
will be used. This is generally the case in interactive applications, for the user would
have to say in advance exactly which objects they were planning to use – this is
inconceivable in browsing-style applications, which allow users to find objects they do
not know about in advance. Deadlocks can also be prevented by requesting locks on
objects in a predefined order, but this can result in premature locking and a reduction in
concurrency.
Upgrade locks • CORBA’s Concurrency Control Service introduces a third type of
lock, called upgrade, the use of which is intended to avoid deadlocks. Deadlocks are
often caused by two conflicting transactions first taking read locks and then attempting
to promote them to write locks. A transaction with an upgrade lock on a data item is
permitted to read that data item, but this lock conflicts with any upgrade locks set by
other transactions on the same data item. This type of lock cannot be set implicitly by
the use of a read operation, but must be requested by the client.
Deadlockdetection • Deadlocks may be detected by finding cycles in the wait-for
graph. Having detected a deadlock, a transaction must be selected for abortion to break
the cycle.
The software responsible for deadlock detection can be part of the lock manager.
It must hold a representation of the wait-for graph so that it can check it for cycles from
time to time. Edges are added to the graph and removed from the graph by the lock
manager’s setLock and unLock operations. At the point illustrated by Figure 16.22 on
the left, it will have the following information:
Transaction Waits for transaction
T U,V
V W
W T,U,V
An edge T(cid:111)(cid:3)U(cid:3)is added whenever the lock manager blocks a request by transaction T
for a lock on an object that is already locked on behalf of transaction U. Note that when


===== page 721 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 703
Figure 16.23 Resolution of the deadlock in Figure 16.19
Transaction T Transaction U
Operations Locks Operations Locks
a.deposit(100); write lock A
b.deposit(200) write lock B
b.withdraw(100)
(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) waits for U’s a.withdraw(200); waits for T’s
lock on B (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) lock on A
(timeout elapses) (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)
T’s lock on A becomes vulnerable,
unlock A, abort T
a.withdraw(200); write lock A
unlock A,B
a lock is shared, several edges may be added. An edge T (cid:111)(cid:3)U(cid:3)is deleted whenever U
releases a lock that T is waiting for and allows T to proceed. See Exercise 16.14 for a
more detailed discussion of the implementation of deadlock detection. If a transaction
shares a lock, the lock is not released, but the edges leading to a particular transaction
are removed.
The presence of cycles may be checked each time an edge is added, or less
frequently to avoid unnecessary overhead. When a deadlock is detected, one of the
transactions in the cycle must be chosen and then be aborted. The corresponding node
and the edges involving it must be removed from the wait-for graph. This will happen
when the aborted transaction has its locks removed.
The choice of the transaction to abort is not simple. Some factors that may be
taken into account are the age of the transaction and the number of cycles in which it is
involved.
Timeouts • Lock timeouts are a method for resolution of deadlocks that is commonly
used. Each lock is given a limited period in which it is invulnerable. After this time, a
lock becomes vulnerable. Provided that no other transaction is competing for the object
that is locked, an object with a vulnerable lock remains locked. However, if any other
transaction is waiting to access the object protected by a vulnerable lock, the lock is
broken (that is, the object is unlocked) and the waiting transaction resumes. The
transaction whose lock has been broken is normally aborted.
There are many problems with the use of timeouts as a remedy for deadlocks: the
worst problem is that transactions are sometimes aborted due to their locks becoming
vulnerable when other transactions are waiting for them, but there is actually no
deadlock. In an overloaded system, the number of transactions timing out will increase,
and transactions taking a long time can be penalized. In addition, it is hard to decide on
an appropriate length for a timeout. In contrast, if deadlock detection is used,


===== page 722 =====
704 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.24 Lock compatibility (read,write and commit locks)
For one object Lock to be set
read write commit
Lock already set none OK OK OK
read OK OK wait
write OK wait –
commit wait wait –
transactions are aborted because deadlocks have occurred and a choice can be made as
to which transaction to abort.
Using lock timeouts, we can resolve the deadlock in Figure 16.19 as shown in
Figure 16.23, in which the write lock for T onA becomes vulnerable after its timeout
period. Transaction U is waiting to acquire a write lock on A. Therefore, T is aborted and
it releases its lock on A, allowing U to resume and complete the transaction.
When transactions access objects located in several different servers, the
possibility of distributed deadlocks arises. In a distributed deadlock, the wait-for graph
can involve objects at multiple locations. We return to this subject in Section 17.5.
16.4.2 Increasing concurrency in locking schemes
Even when locking rules are based on the conflicts between read and write operations
and the granularity at which they are applied is as small as possible, there is still some
scope for increasing concurrency. We discuss two approaches that have been used to
deal with this issue. In the first approach (two-version locking), the setting of exclusive
locks is delayed until a transaction commits. In the second approach (hierarchic locks),
mixed-granularity locks are used.
Two-versionlocking • This is an optimistic scheme that allows one transaction to write
tentative versions of objects while other transactions read from the committed versions
of the same objects. read operations only wait if another transaction is currently
committing the same object. This scheme allows more concurrency than read-write
locks, but writing transactions risk waiting or even rejection when they attempt to
commit. Transactions cannot commit their write operations immediately if other
uncompleted transactions have read the same objects. Therefore, transactions that
request to commit in such a situation are made to wait until the reading transactions have
completed. Deadlocks may occur when transactions are waiting to commit. Therefore,
transactions may need to be aborted when they are waiting to commit, to resolve
deadlocks.
This variation on strict two-phase locking uses three types of lock: a read lock, a
write lock and a commit lock. Before a transaction’s read operation is performed, a read
lock must be set on the object – the attempt to set a read lock is successful unless the
object has a commit lock, in which case the transaction waits. Before a transaction’s


===== page 723 =====
SECTION 16.4 LOCKS 705
Figure 16.25 Lock hierarchy for the banking example
Branch
A B C Account
write operation is performed, a write lock must be set on the object – the attempt to set
a write lock is successful unless the object has a write lock or a commit lock, in which
case the transaction waits.
When the transaction coordinator receives a request to commit a transaction, it
attempts to convert all that transaction’s write locks to commit locks. If any of the
objects have outstanding read locks, the transaction must wait until the transactions that
set these locks have completed and the locks are released. The compatibility of read,
write and commit locks is shown in Figure 16.24.
There are two main differences in performance between the two-version locking
scheme and an ordinary read-write locking scheme. On the one hand, read operations in
the two-version locking scheme are delayed only while the transactions are being
committed, rather than during the entire execution of transactions – in most cases, the
commit protocol takes only a small fraction of the time required to perform an entire
transaction. On the other hand, read operations of one transaction can cause delays in
committing other transactions.
Hierarchiclocks • In some applications, the granularity suitable for one operation is not
appropriate for another operation. In our banking example, the majority of the
operations require locking at the granularity of an account. The branchTotal operation
is different – it reads the values of all the account balances and would appear to require
a read lock on all of them. To reduce locking overhead, it would be useful to allow locks
of mixed granularity to coexist.
Gray [1978] proposed the use of a hierarchy of locks with different granularities.
At each level, the setting of a parent lock has the same effect as setting all the equivalent
child locks. This economizes on the number of locks to be set. In our banking example,
the branch is the parent and the accounts are children (see Figure 16.25).
Mixed-granularity locks could be useful in a diary system in which the data could
bestructured with the diary for a week being composed of a page for each day and the
Figure 16.26 Lock hierarchy for a diary
Week
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
timeslots
9:00–10:00 10:00–11:00 11:00–12:00 12:00–13:00 13:00–14:00 14:00–15:00 15:00–16:00


===== page 724 =====
706 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.27 Lock compatibility table for hierarchic locks
For one object Lock to be set
read write I-read I-write
Lock already set none OK OK OK OK
read OK wait OK wait
write wait wait wait wait
I-read OK wait OK OK
I-write wait wait OK OK
latter subdivided further into a slot for each hour of the day, as shown in Figure 16.26.
The operation to view a week would cause a read lock to be set at the top of this
hierarchy, whereas the operation to enter an appointment would cause a write lock to be
set on a given time slot. The effect of a read lock on a week would be to prevent write
operations on any of the substructures – for example, the time slots for each day in that
week.
In Gray’s scheme, each node in the hierarchy can be locked, giving the owner of
the lock explicit access to the node and giving implicit access to its children. In our
example, in Figure 16.25 a read-write lock on the branch implicitly read-write locks all
the accounts. Before a child node is granted a read-write lock, an intention to read-write
lock is set on the parent node and its ancestors (if any). The intention lock is compatible
with other intention locks but conflicts with read and write locks according to the usual
rules. Figure 16.27 gives the compatibility table for hierarchic locks. Gray also proposed
a third type of intention lock – one that combines the properties of a read lock with an
intention to write lock.
In our banking example, the branchTotal operation requests a read lock on the
branch, which implicitly sets read locks on all the accounts. A deposit operation needs
to set a write lock on a balance, but first it attempts to set an intention to write lock on
the branch. These rules prevent these operations running concurrently.
Hierarchic locks have the advantage of reducing the number of locks when mixed-
granularity locking is required. The compatibility tables and the rules for promoting
locks are more complex.
The mixed granularity of locks could allow each transaction to lock a portion
whose size is chosen according to its needs. A long transaction that accesses many
objects could lock the whole collection, whereas a short transaction can lock at finer
granularity.
The CORBA Concurrency Control Service supports variable-granularity locking
with intention to read and intention to write lock types. These can be used as described
above to take advantage the opportunity to apply locks at differing granularities in
hierarchically structured data.


===== page 725 =====
SECTION 16.5 OPTIMISTIC CONCURRENCY CONTROL 707
16.5 Optimistic concurrency control
Kung and Robinson [1981] identified a number of inherent disadvantages of locking and
proposed an alternative optimistic approach to the serialization of transactions that
avoids these drawbacks. We can summarize the drawbacks of locking:
(cid:129) Lock maintenance represents an overhead that is not present in systems that do not
support concurrent access to shared data. Even read-only transactions (queries),
which cannot possibly affect the integrity of the data, must, in general, use locking
in order to guarantee that the data being read is not modified by other transactions
at the same time. But locking may be necessary only in the worst case.
For example, consider two client processes that are concurrently incrementing the
values of n objects. If the client programs start at the same time and run for about
the same amount of time, accessing the objects in two unrelated sequences and
using a separate transaction to access and increment each item, the chances that
the two programs will attempt to access the same object at the same time are just
1 in n on average, so locking is really needed only once in every n transactions.
(cid:129) The use of locks can result in deadlock. Deadlock prevention reduces concurrency
severely, and therefore deadlock situations must be resolved either by the use of
timeouts or by deadlock detection. Neither of these is wholly satisfactory for use
in interactive programs.
(cid:129) To avoid cascading aborts, locks cannot be released until the end of the
transaction. This may reduce significantly the potential for concurrency.
The alternative approach proposed by Kung and Robinson is ‘optimistic’ because it is
based on the observation that, in most applications, the likelihood of two clients’
transactions accessing the same object is low. Transactions are allowed to proceed as
though there were no possibility of conflict with other transactions until the client
completes its task and issues a closeTransaction request. When a conflict arises, some
transaction is generally aborted and will need to be restarted by the client. Each
transaction has the following phases:
Working phase: During the working phase, each transaction has a tentative version
of each of the objects that it updates. This is a copy of the most recently committed
version of the object. The use of tentative versions allows the transaction to abort
(with no effect on the objects), either during the working phase or if it fails validation
due to other conflicting transactions. read operations are performed immediately – if
a tentative version for that transaction already exists, a read operation accesses it;
otherwise, it accesses the most recently committed value of the object. write
operations record the new values of the objects as tentative values (which are
invisible to other transactions). When there are several concurrent transactions,
several different tentative values of the same object may coexist. In addition, two
records are kept of the objects accessed within a transaction: a read set containing the
objects read by the transaction and a write set containing the objects written by the
transaction. Note that as all read operations are performed on committed versions of
the objects (or copies of them), dirty reads cannot occur.


===== page 726 =====
708 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Validation phase: When the closeTransaction request is received, the transaction is
validated to establish whether or not its operations on objects conflict with operations
of other transactions on the same objects. If the validation is successful, then the
transaction can commit. If the validation fails, then some form of conflict resolution
must be used and either the current transaction or, in some cases, those with which it
conflicts will need to be aborted.
Update phase:If a transaction is validated, all of the changes recorded in its tentative
versions are made permanent. Read-only transactions can commit immediately after
passing validation. Write transactions are ready to commit once the tentative versions
of the objects have been recorded in permanent storage.
Validationoftransactions • Validation uses the read-write conflict rules to ensure that
the scheduling of a particular transaction is serially equivalent with respect to all other
overlapping transactions – that is, any transactions that had not yet committed at the time
this transaction started. To assist in performing validation, each transaction is assigned
a transaction number when it enters the validation phase (that is, when the client issues
acloseTransaction). If the transaction is validated and completes successfully, it retains
this number; if it fails the validation checks and is aborted, or if the transaction is read
only, the number is released for reassignment. Transaction numbers are integers
assigned in ascending sequence; the number of a transaction therefore defines its
position in time – a transaction always finishes its working phase after all transactions
with lower numbers. That is, a transaction with the number T i always precedes a
transaction with the number T j if i<j. (If the transaction number were to be assigned at
the beginning of the working phase, then a transaction that reached the end of the
working phase before one with a lower number would have to wait until the earlier one
had completed before it could be validated.)
The validation test on transaction T vis based on conflicts between operations in
pairs of transactions T i and T v. For a transaction T v to be serializable with respect to an
overlapping transaction T i, their operations must conform to the following rules:
T T Rule
v i
write read 1. T i must not read objects written by T v.
read write 2. T v must not read objects written by T i.
write write 3. T i must not write objects written by T vand(cid:3)
T v must not write objects written by T i.
As the validation and update phases of a transaction are generally short in duration
compared with the working phase, a simplification can be achieved by making the rule
that only one transaction may be in the validation and update phase at one time. When
no two transactions may overlap in the update phase, rule 3 is satisfied. Note that this
restriction on write operations, together with the fact that no dirty reads can occur,
produces strict executions. To prevent overlapping, the entire validation and update
phases can be implemented as a critical section so that only one client at a time can
execute it. In order to increase concurrency, part of the validation and updating may be


===== page 727 =====
SECTION 16.5 OPTIMISTIC CONCURRENCY CONTROL 709
Figure 16.28 Validation of transactions
Working Validation Update
T1
Earlier committed
transactions
T2
T3
Transaction
being validated Tv
active1
Later active
transactions
active2
implemented outside the critical section, but it is essential that the assignment of
transaction numbers is performed sequentially. We note that at any instant, the current
transaction number is like a pseudo-clock that ticks whenever a transaction completes
successfully.
The validation of a transaction must ensure that rules 1 and 2 are obeyed by testing
for overlaps between the objects of pairs of transactions T v and T i. There are two forms
of validation – backward and forward [Härder 1984]. Backward validation checks the
transaction undergoing validation with other preceding overlapping transactions – those
that entered the validation phase before it. Forward validation checks the transaction
undergoing validation with other later transactions, which are still active.
Backwardvalidation • As all the read operations of earlier overlapping transactions
were performed before the validation of T v started, they cannot be affected by the writes
of the current transaction (and rule 1 is satisfied). The validation of transaction T v checks
whether its read set (the objects affected by the read operations of T v) overlaps with any
of the write sets of earlier overlapping transactions, T i (rule 2). If there is any overlap,
the validation fails.
LetstartTn be the biggest transaction number assigned (to some other committed
transaction) at the time when transaction T v started its working phase and finishTn be the
biggest transaction number assigned at the time when T v entered the validation phase.
The following program describes the algorithm for the validation of T v:
boolean valid = true;
for (int T i =startTn+1;T i <= finishTn;T i++){
if (read set of T v intersects write set of T i) valid = false;
}
Figure 16.28 shows overlapping transactions that might be considered in the validation
of a transaction T . Time increases from left to right. The earlier committed transactions
v
are T 1 , T 2 and T 3 . T 1 committed before T v started. T 2 and T 3 committed before T v
finished its working phase. StartTn + 1 = T and finishTn = T . In backward validation,
2 3
the read set of T v must be compared with the write sets of T 2 and T 3 .


===== page 728 =====
710 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
In backward validation, the read set of the transaction being validated is compared
with the write sets of other transactions that have already committed. Therefore, the only
way to resolve any conflicts is to abort the transaction that is undergoing validation.
In backward validation, transactions that have no read operations (only write
operations) need not be checked.
Optimistic concurrency control with backward validation requires that the write
sets of old committed versions of objects corresponding to recently committed
transactions are retained until there are no unvalidated overlapping transactions with
which they might conflict. Whenever a transaction is successfully validated, its
transaction number, startTn and write set are recorded in a preceding transactions list that
is maintained by the transaction service. Note that this list is ordered by transaction
number. In an environment with long transactions, the retention of old write sets of
objects may be a problem. For example, in Figure 16.28 the write sets of T ,T ,T and
1 2 3
T v must be retained until the active transaction active 1 completes. Note that the although
the active transactions have transaction identifiers, they do not yet have transaction
numbers.
Forwardvalidation • In forward validation of the transaction T v, the write set of T v is
compared with the read sets of all overlapping active transactions – those that are still in
their working phase (rule 1). Rule 2 is automatically fulfilled because the active
transactions do not write until after T v has completed. Let the active transactions have
(consecutive) transaction identifiers active 1 to active N .The following program describes
the algorithm for the forward validation of T v:
boolean valid = true;
for (int T id = active 1;T id <= active N;T id++){
if (write set of T v intersects read set of T id) valid = false;
}
In Figure 16.28, the write set of transaction T v must be compared with the read sets of
the transactions with identifiers active and active . (Forward validation should allow
1 2
for the fact that read sets of active transactions may change during validation and
writing.)As the read sets of the transaction being validated are not included in the check,
read-only transactions always pass the validation check. As the transactions being
compared with the validating transaction are still active, we have a choice of whether to
abort the validating transaction or to pursue some alternative way of resolving the
conflict. Härder [1984] suggests several alternative strategies:
(cid:129) Defer the validation until a later time when the conflicting transactions have
finished. However, there is no guarantee that the transaction being validated will
fare any better in the future. There is always the chance that further conflicting
active transactions may start before the validation is achieved.
(cid:129) Abort all the conflicting active transactions and commit the transaction being
validated.
(cid:129) Abort the transaction being validated. This is the simplest strategy but has the
disadvantage that future conflicting transactions may be going to abort, in which
case the transaction under validation has aborted unnecessarily.


===== page 729 =====
SECTION 16.6 TIMESTAMP ORDERING 711
Comparison of forward and backward validation • We have already seen that forward
validation allows flexibility in the resolution of conflicts, whereas backward validation
allows only one choice – to abort the transaction being validated. In general, the read
sets of transactions are much larger than the write sets. Therefore, backward validation
compares a possibly large read set against the old write sets, whereas forward validation
checks a small write set against the read sets of active transactions. We see that
backward validation has the overhead of storing old write sets until they are no longer
needed. On the other hand, forward validation has to allow for new transactions starting
during the validation process.
Starvation • When a transaction is aborted, it will normally be restarted by the client
program. But in schemes that rely on aborting and restarting transactions, there is no
guarantee that a particular transaction will ever pass the validation checks, for it may
come into conflict with other transactions for the use of objects each time it is restarted.
The prevention of a transaction ever being able to commit is called starvation.
Occurrences of starvation are likely to be rare, but a server that uses optimistic
concurrency control must ensure that a client does not have its transaction aborted
repeatedly. Kung and Robinson suggest that this could be done if the server detects a
transaction that has been aborted several times. They suggest that when the server
detects such a transaction it should be given exclusive access by the use of a critical
section protected by a semaphore.
16.6 Timestamp ordering
In concurrency control schemes based on timestamp ordering, each operation in a
transaction is validated when it is carried out. If the operation cannot be validated, the
transaction is aborted immediately and can then be restarted by the client. Each
transaction is assigned a unique timestamp value when it starts. The timestamp defines
its position in the time sequence of transactions. Requests from transactions can be
totally ordered according to their timestamps. The basic timestamp ordering rule is
based on operation conflicts and is very simple:
A transaction’s request to write an object is valid only if that object was last read and
written by earlier transactions. A transaction’s request to read an object is valid only
if that object was last written by an earlier transaction.
This rule assumes that there is only one version of each object and restricts access to one
transaction at a time. If each transaction has its own tentative version of each object it
accesses, then multiple concurrent transactions can access the same object. The
timestamp ordering rule is refined to ensure that each transaction accesses a consistent
set of versions of the objects. It must also ensure that the tentative versions of each object
are committed in the order determined by the timestamps of the transactions that made
them. This is achieved by transactions waiting, when necessary, for earlier transactions
to complete their writes. The write operations may be performed after the
closeTransaction operation has returned, without making the client wait. But the client
must wait when read operations need to wait for earlier transactions to finish. This


===== page 730 =====
712 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.29 Operation conflicts for timestamp ordering
Rule T T
c i
1. write read T c must not write an object that has been read by any T i where T i > T c .
This requires that T c (cid:149) the maximum read timestamp of the object.
2. write write T c must not write an object that has been written by any T i where T i >T c.
This requires that T c > the write timestamp of the committed object.
3. read write T c must not read an object that has been written by any T i where T i > T c.
This requires that T c> the write timestamp of the committed object.
cannot lead to deadlock, since transactions only wait for earlier ones (and no cycle could
occur in the wait-for graph).
Timestamps may be assigned from the server’s clock or, as in the previous section,
a ‘pseudo-time’ may be based on a counter that is incremented whenever a timestamp
value is issued. We defer until Chapter 17 the problem of generating timestamps when
the transaction service is distributed and several servers are involved in a transaction.
We will now describe a form of timestamp-based concurrency control following
the methods adopted in the SDD-1 system [Bernstein et al. 1980] and described by Ceri
and Pelagatti [1985].
As usual, the write operations are recorded in tentative versions of objects and are
invisible to other transactions until a closeTransaction request is issued and the
transaction is committed. Every object has a write timestamp and a set of tentative
versions, each of which has a write timestamp associated with it; each object also has a
set of read timestamps. The write timestamp of the (committed) object is earlier than that
of any of its tentative versions, and the set of read timestamps can be represented by its
maximum member. Whenever a transaction’s write operation on an object is accepted,
the server creates a new tentative version of the object with its write timestamp set to the
transaction timestamp. A transaction’s read operation is directed to the version with the
maximum write timestamp less than the transaction timestamp. Whenever a
transaction’s read operation on an object is accepted, the timestamp of the transaction is
added to its set of read timestamps. When a transaction is committed, the values of the
tentative versions become the values of the objects, and the timestamps of the tentative
versions become the timestamps of the corresponding objects.
In timestamp ordering, each request by a transaction for a read or write operation
on an object is checked to see whether it conforms to the operation conflict rules. A
request by the current transaction T c can conflict with previous operations done by other
transactions, T i, whose timestamps indicate that they should be later than T c. These rules
are shown in Figure 16.29, in which T i>T c means T i is later than T c and T i<T c means
T i, is earlier than T c.


===== page 731 =====
SECTION 16.6 TIMESTAMP ORDERING 713
Figure 16.30 Write operations and timestamps
(a)T3write (b) T3write
Before T2 Before T1 T2
After T2 T3 After T1 T2 T3
Time Time
(c)T3write (d) T3write
Transaction
Before
T1 T4
Before
T4 aborts
After T1 T3 T4 After T4
Time Time
Key:
Ti Ti
object produced by transaction Ti(cid:3)
(with write timestamp Ti)
Committed Tentative T1 < T2 <T3 <T4
Timestamp ordering write rule: By combining rules 1 and 2 we get the following rule for
deciding whether to accept a write operation requested by transaction T con object D:
if (T c (cid:149) maximum read timestamp on D&&
T c> write timestamp on committed version of D)
performwrite operation on tentative version of D with write timestamp T c
else /* write is too late */
Abort transaction T c
If a tentative version with write timestamp T c already exists, the write operation is
addressed to it; otherwise, a new tentative version is created and given write timestamp
T c. Note that any write that ‘arrives too late’ is aborted – it is too late in the sense that a
transaction with a later timestamp has already read or written the object.
Figure 16.30 illustrates the action of a write operation by transaction T in cases
3
where T 3(cid:149)maximumreadtimestamp on the object (the read timestamps are not
shown). In cases (a) to (c), T >writetimestamp on the committed version of the object
3
and a tentative version with write timestamp T is inserted at the appropriate place in the
3
list of tentative versions ordered by their transaction timestamps. In case (d),
T <writetimestamp on the committed version of the object and the transaction is
3
aborted.


===== page 732 =====
714 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Timestamp ordering read rule: By using rule 3 we arrive at the following rule for
deciding whether to accept immediately, to wait or to reject a read operation requested
by transaction T c on object D:
if ( T c>write timestamp on committed version of D) {
letD selected be the version of D with the maximum write timestamp ð T c
if (D is committed)
selected
performread operation on the version D
selected
else
wait until the transaction that made version D
selected
commits or aborts(cid:3)
then reapply the read rule
} else
Abort transaction T c
Note:
(cid:129) If transaction T c has already written its own version of the object, this will be used.
(cid:129) A read operation that arrives too early waits for the earlier transaction to complete.
If the earlier transaction commits, then T c will read from its committed version. If
it aborts, then T cwill repeat the read rule (and select the previous version). This
rule prevents dirty reads.
(cid:129) A read operation that ‘arrives too late’ is aborted – it is too late in the sense that a
transaction with a later timestamp has already written the object.
Figure 16.31 illustrates the timestamp ordering read rule. It includes four cases labelled
(a) to (d), each of which illustrates the action of a read operation by transaction T . In
3
each case, a version whose write timestamp is less than or equal to T is selected. If such
3
a version exists, it is indicated with a line. In cases (a) and (b) the read operation is
directed to a committed version – in (a) it is the only version, whereas in (b) there is a
tentative version belonging to a later transaction. In case (c) the read operation is
directed to a tentative version and must wait until the transaction that made it commits
or aborts. In case (d) there is no suitable version to read and transaction T is aborted.
3
When a coordinator receives a request to commit a transaction, it will always be
able to do so because all the operations of transactions are checked for consistency with
those of earlier transactions before being carried out. The committed versions of each
object must be created in timestamp order. Therefore, a coordinator sometimes needs to
wait for earlier transactions to complete before writing all the committed versions of the
objects accessed by a particular transaction, but there is no need for the client to wait. In
order to make a transaction recoverable after a server crash, the tentative versions of
objects and the fact that the transaction has committed must be written to permanent
storage before acknowledging the client’s request to commit the transaction.
Note that this timestamp ordering algorithm is a strict one – it ensures strict
executions of transactions (see Section 16.2). The timestamp ordering read rule delays
a transaction’s read operation on any object until all transactions that had previously
written that object have committed or aborted. The arrangement to commit versions in
order ensures that the execution of a transaction’s write operation on any object is
delayed until all transactions that had previously written that object have committed or
aborted.


===== page 733 =====
SECTION 16.6 TIMESTAMP ORDERING 715
Figure 16.31 Read operations and timestamps
(a)T3read (b) T3read
read read
T2
proceeds
T2 T4
proceeds
Selected Selected
Time Time
(c) T3read (d) T3read
read waits Transaction
T1 T2 T4
aborts
Selected
Time Time
Key: Ti Ti object produced by transaction Ti
(with write timestamp Ti)
Committed Tentative T1 < T2 < T3 < T4
In Figure 16.32, we return to our illustration concerning the two concurrent
banking transactions T and U introduced in Figure 16.7. The columns headed A,B and
C refer to information about accounts with those names. Each account has an entry RTS
that records the maximum read timestamp and an entry WTS that records the write
timestamp of each version – with timestamps of committed versions in bold. Initially,
all accounts have committed versions written by transaction S, and the set of read
timestamps is empty. We assume S<T<U. The example shows that when transaction
U is ready to get the balance of B it will wait for T to complete so that it can read the
value set by T if it commits.
The timestamp method just described does avoid deadlocks, but it is quite likely
to cause restarts. A modification known as the ‘ignore obsolete write’ rule is an
improvement. This is a modification to the timestamp ordering write rule:
If a write is too late it can be ignored instead of aborting the transaction, because if it
had arrived in time its effects would have been overwritten anyway. However, if
another transaction has read the object, the transaction with the late write fails due to
the read timestamp on the item.
Multiversiontimestampordering • In this section, we have shown how the
concurrency provided by basic timestamp ordering is improved by allowing each
transaction to write its own tentative versions of objects. In multiversion timestamp
ordering, which was introduced by Reed [1983], a list of old committed versions as well
as tentative versions is kept for each object. This list represents the history of the values


===== page 734 =====
716 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Figure 16.32 Timestamps in transactions T and U
Timestamps and versions of objects
T U A B C
RTS WTS RTS WTS RTS WTS
{} S {} S {} S
openTransaction
bal = b.getBalance() {T}
openTransaction
b.setBalance(bal*1.1) S(cid:15)(cid:3)T
bal = b.getBalance()
wait for T
a.withdraw(bal/10) (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) S(cid:15)(cid:3)T
commit (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) T T
bal = b.getBalance() {U}
b.setBalance(bal*1.1) T(cid:15)(cid:3)U
c.withdraw(bal/10) S(cid:15)(cid:3)U
of the object. The benefit of using multiple versions is that read operations that arrive
too late need not be rejected.
Each version has a read timestamp recording the largest timestamp of any
transaction that has read from it in addition to a write timestamp. As before, whenever
awrite operation is accepted, it is directed to a tentative version with the write timestamp
of the transaction. Whenever a read operation is carried out, it is directed to the version
with the largest write timestamp less than the transaction timestamp. If the transaction
timestamp is larger than the read timestamp of the version being used, the read
timestamp of the version is set to the transaction timestamp.
When a read arrives late, it can be allowed to read from an old committed version,
so there is no need to abort late read operations. In multiversion timestamp ordering,
read operations are always permitted, although they may have to wait for earlier
transactions to complete (either commit or abort), which ensures that executions are
recoverable. See Exercise 16.22 for a discussion of the possibility of cascading aborts.
This deals with rule 3 in the conflict rules for timestamp ordering.
There is no conflict between write operations of different transactions, because
each transaction writes its own committed version of the objects it accesses. This
removes rule 2 in the conflict rules for timestamp ordering, leaving us with:
Rule 1. T c must not write objects that have been read by any T iwhereT i >T c.
This rule will be broken if there is any version of the object with readtimestamp >T c,
but only if this version has a write timestamp less than or equal to T c. (This write cannot
have any effect on later versions.)


===== page 735 =====
SECTION 16.6 TIMESTAMP ORDERING 717
Figure 16.33 Latewrite operation would invalidate a read
T read; T write; T read; T4 write;
3 3 5
T1
T2 T3
T3 T5
Time
T1 < T2 < T3 < T4 < T5
Key: Ti Ti object produced by transaction
Tk Tk Ti(with write timestamp Ti and
Committed Tentative read timestamp Tk)
Multiversion timestamp ordering write rule: As any potentially conflicting read operation
will have been directed to the most recent version of an object, the server inspects the
version D maxEarlier with the maximum write timestamp less than or equal to T c. We have
the following rule for performing a write operation requested by transaction T c on object
D:
if (read timestamp of D maxEarlier(cid:148)T c)
performwrite operation on a tentative version of D with write timestamp T c
else abort transaction T c
Figure 16.33 illustrates an example where a write is rejected. The object already has
committed versions with write timestamps T and T . The object receives the following
1 2
sequence of requests for operations on the object:
T
3
read;T
3
write;T
5
read;T
4
write.
1. T requests a read operation, which puts a read timestamp T on T ’s version.
3 3 2
2. T requests a write operation, which makes a new tentative version with write
3
timestamp T .
3
3. T 5 requests a read operation, which uses the version with write timestamp T 3 (the
highest timestamp that is less than T ).
5
4. T
4
requests a write operation, which is rejected because the read timestamp T 5of
the version with write timestamp T is bigger than T . (If it were permitted, the
3 4
write timestamp of the new version would be T . If such a version were allowed,
4
then it would invalidate T ’sread operation, which should have used the version
5
with timestamp T .)
4


===== page 736 =====
718 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
When a transaction is aborted, all the versions that it created are deleted. When a
transaction is committed, all the versions that it created are retained, but to control the
use of storage space, old versions must be deleted from time to time. Although it has the
overhead of storage space, multiversion timestamp ordering does allow considerable
concurrency, does not suffer from deadlocks and always permits read operations. For
further information about multiversion timestamp ordering, see Bernstein et al. [1987].
16.7 Comparison of methods for concurrency control
We have described three separate methods for controlling concurrent access to shared
data: strict two-phase locking, optimistic methods and timestamp ordering. All of the
methods carry some overheads in the time and space they require, and they all limit to
some extent the potential for concurrent operation.
The timestamp ordering method is similar to two-phase locking in that both use
pessimistic approaches in which conflicts between transactions are detected as each
object is accessed. On the one hand, timestamp ordering decides the serialization order
statically – when a transaction starts. On the other hand, two-phase locking decides the
serialization order dynamically – according to the order in which objects are accessed.
Timestamp ordering, and in particular multiversion timestamp ordering, is better than
strict two-phase locking for read-only transactions. Two-phase locking is better when
the operations in transactions are predominantly updates.
Some work uses the observation that timestamp ordering is beneficial for
transactions with predominantly read operations and that locking is beneficial for
transactions with more writes than reads as an argument for allowing hybrid schemes in
which some transactions use timestamp ordering and others use locking for concurrency
control. Readers who are interested in the use of mixed methods should read Bernstein
et al. [1987].
The pessimistic methods differ in the strategy used when a conflicting access to
an object is detected. Timestamp ordering aborts the transaction immediately, whereas
locking makes the transaction wait – but with a possible later penalty of aborting to
avoid deadlock.
When optimistic concurrency control is used, all transactions are allowed to
proceed, but some are aborted when they attempt to commit, or in forward validation
transactions are aborted earlier. This results in relatively efficient operation when there
are few conflicts, but a substantial amount of work may have to be repeated when a
transaction is aborted.
Locking has been in use for many years in database systems, but timestamp
ordering has been used in the SDD-1 database system. Both methods have been used in
file servers. However, historically, the predominant method of concurrency control of
access to data in distributed systems is by locking – for example, as mentioned earlier,
the CORBA Concurrency Control Service is based entirely on the use of locks. In
particular, it provides hierarchic locking, which allows for mixed-granularity locking on
hierarchically structured data.


===== page 737 =====
SECTION 16.7 COMPARISON OF METHODS FOR CONCURRENCY CONTROL 719
Several research distributed systems, for example Argus [Liskov 1988] and
Arjuna [Shrivastava et al. 1991], have explored the use of semantic locks, timestamp
ordering and new approaches to long transactions.
Ellis et al. [1991] wrote a review of requirements for multi-user applications in
which all users expect to see common views of objects being updated by any of the
users. Many of the schemes provided notification of changes made by other users, but
this is contrary to the idea of isolation.
Barghouti and Kaiser [1991] wrote a review of what are sometimes described as
‘advanced database applications’ – for example, cooperative CAD/CAM and software
development systems. In such applications, transactions last for a long time, and users
work on independent versions of objects that are checked out from a common database
and checked in when the work is finished. The merging of versions requires cooperation
between users.
Simililarly, the above concurrency control mechanisms are not always adequate
for twenty-first-century applications that enable users to share documents over the
Internet. Many of the latter use optimistic forms of concurrency control followed by
conflict resolution instead of aborting one of any pair of conflicting operations.
The following are some examples.
Dropbox • Dropbox [www.dropbox.com] is a cloud service that provides file backup
and enables users to share files and folders, accessing them from anywhere. Dropbox
uses an optimistic form of concurrency control, keeping track of consistency and
preventing clashes between users’ updates – which are at the granularity of whole files.
Thus if two users make concurrent updates to the same file, the first write will be
accepted and the second rejected. However, Dropbox provides a version history to
enable users to merge their updates manually or restore previous versions.
Google apps • Google Apps [www.google.com I] are listed in Figure 21.2. They
include Google Docs, a cloud service that provides web-based applications (word
processor, spreadsheet and presentation) that allow users to collaborate with one
another by means of shared documents. If several people edit the same document
simultaneously, they will see each other’s changes. In the case of a word processor
document, users can see one another’s cursors and updates are shown at the level of
individual characters as they are typed by any participant. Users are left to resolve any
conflicts that occur, but conflicts are generally avoided because users are continuously
aware of each other’s activities. In the case of a spreadsheet document, users’ cursors
and changes are displayed and updated at the granularity of single cells. If two users
access the same cell simultaneously, the last update wins.
Wikipedia • Concurrency control for editing is optimistic, allowing editors concurrent
access to web pages in which the first write is accepted and a user making a subsequent
write is shown an ‘edit conflict’ screen and asked to resolve the conflicts.
Dynamo • Amazon.com’s key-value storage service uses optimistic concurrency
control with conflict resolution (see the box on the next page).


===== page 738 =====
720 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
Dynamo
Dynamo [DeCandia et al. 2007] is one of the storage services used by Amazon.com,
whose platform serves tens of millions of customers at peak times, using tens of
thousands of servers. Such a setting makes very strong demands in terms of
performance, reliability and scalability. Dynamo was designed to support
applications such as the shopping carts and best-seller lists that require only primary
key access to a value in a data store. Data is heavily replicated with a view to
providing the scalability and availability that are key to these services.
Dynamo uses single get and put operations rather than transactions and does
not provide the isolation guarantee specified in the ACID properties. So as to
improve availability, it also provides a weaker form of consistency – which is
acceptable in the applications it supports.
Optimistic methods are used for concurrency control. In cases where versions
differ, they must be reconciled. Application logic can be used to merge versions in
the case of the shopping cart application.
Where application logic cannot be used, timestamp-based reconciliation is
applied. Dynamo uses the rule that ‘last write wins’ – the version with the largest
timestamp becomes the new one.
16.8 Summary
Transactions provide a means by which clients can specify sequences of operations that
are atomic in the presence of other concurrent transactions and server crashes. The first
aspect of atomicity is achieved by running transactions so that their effects are serially
equivalent. The effects of committed transactions are recorded in permanent storage so
that the transaction service can recover from process crashes. To allow transactions the
ability to abort, without having harmful side effects on other transactions, executions
must be strict – that is, reads and writes of one transaction must be delayed until other
transactions that wrote the same objects have either committed or aborted. To allow
transactions the choice of either committing or aborting, their operations are performed
in tentative versions that cannot be accessed by other transactions. The tentative
versions of objects are copied to the real objects and to permanent storage when a
transaction commits.
Nested transactions are formed by structuring transactions from other sub-
transactions. Nesting is particularly useful in distributed systems because it allows
concurrent execution of subtransactions in separate servers. Nesting also has the
advantage of allowing independent recovery of parts of a transaction.
Operation conflicts form a basis for the derivation of concurrency control
protocols. Protocols must not only ensure serializability but also allow for recovery by
using strict executions to avoid problems associated with transactions aborting, such as
cascading aborts.
Three alternative strategies are possible in scheduling an operation in a
transaction. They are (1) to execute it immediately, (2) to delay it or (3) to abort it.


===== page 739 =====
EXERCISES 721
Strict two-phase locking uses the first two strategies, resorting to abortion only in
the case of deadlock. It ensures serializability by ordering transactions according to
when they access common objects. Its main drawback is that deadlocks can occur.
Timestamp ordering uses all three strategies to ensure serializability by ordering
transactions’ accesses to objects according to the time transactions start. This method
cannot suffer from deadlocks and is advantageous for read-only transactions. However,
transactions must be aborted when they arrive too late. Multiversion timestamp ordering
is particularly effective.
Optimistic concurrency control allows transactions to proceed without any form
of checking until they are completed. Transactions are validated before being allowed
to commit. Backward validation requires the maintenance of multiple write sets of
committed transactions, whereas forward validation must validate against active
transactions and has the advantage that it allows alternative strategies for resolving
conflicts. Starvation can occur due to repeated aborting of a transaction that fails
validation in optimistic concurrency control and even in timestamp ordering.
EXERCISES
16.1 The TaskBag is a service whose functionality is to provide a repository for ‘task
descriptions’. It enables clients running in several computers to carry out parts of a
computation in parallel. A master process places descriptions of subtasks of a
computation in the TaskBag, and worker processes select tasks from the TaskBag and
carry them out, returning descriptions of their results to the TaskBag. The master then
collects the results and combines them to produce the final result.
The TaskBag service provides the following operations:
setTask allows clients to add task descriptions to the bag;
takeTask allows clients to take task descriptions out of the bag.
A client makes the request takeTask, when a task is not available but may be available
soon. Discuss the advantages and drawbacks of the following alternatives:
i) The server can reply immediately, telling the client to try again later.
ii) The server operation (and therefore the client) must wait until a task
becomes available.
iii) Callbacks are used. page 678
16.2 A server manages the objects a ,a , ..., a . The server provides two operations for its
1 2 n
clients:
read (i) returns the value of a i;
write(i, Value) assigns Value to a i.
The transactions T and U are defined as follows:
T: x = read(j); y = read (i); write(j, 44); write(i, 33);
U:x = read(k);write(i, 55); y = read (j); write(k, 66).
Give three serially equivalent interleavings of the transactions T and U. page 685


===== page 740 =====
722 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
16.3 Give serially equivalent interleavings of T and U in Exercise 16.2 with the following
properties:
i) that are strict;
ii) that are not strict but could not produce cascading aborts;
iii) that could produce cascading aborts. page 689
16.4 The operationcreate inserts a new bank account at a branch.The transactions T and U
are defined as follows:
T: aBranch.create("Z");
U:z.deposit(10); z.deposit(20).
Assume that Zdoes not yet exist. Assume also that the deposit operation does nothing if
the account given as the argument does not exist. Consider the following interleaving of
transactions T and U:
T U
z.deposit(10);
aBranch.create(Z);
z.deposit(20);
State the balance of Z after their execution in this order. Are these consistent with
serially equivalent executions of T and U? page 685
16.5 A newly created object like Z in Exercise 16.4 is sometimes called a phantom. From the
point of view of transaction U, Z is not there at first and then appears (like a ghost).
Explain, with an example, how a phantom could occur when an account is deleted.
16.6 The ‘transfer’ transactions T andU are defined as:
T: a.withdraw(4); b.deposit(4);
U: c.withdraw(3); b.deposit(3);
Suppose that they are structured as pairs of nested transactions:
T : a.withdraw(4); T : b.deposit(4);
1 2
U : c.withdraw(3); U : b.deposit(3);
1 2
Compare the number of serially equivalent interleavings of T ,T ,U and U with the
1 2 1 2
number of serially equivalent interleavings of T and U. Explain why the use of these
nested transactions generally permits a larger number of serially equivalent
interleavings than non-nested ones. page 685
16.7 Consider the recovery aspects of the nested transactions defined in Exercise 16.6.
Assume that a withdraw transaction will abort if the account will be overdrawn and that
in this case the parent transaction will also abort. Describe serially equivalent
interleavings of T ,T ,U and U with the following properties:
1 2 1 2
i) that are strict;
ii) that are not strict.
To what extent does the criterion of strictness reduce the potential concurrency gain of
nested transactions? page 685


===== page 741 =====
EXERCISES 723
16.8 Explain why serial equivalence requires that once a transaction has released a lock on
an object, it is not allowed to obtain any more locks.
A server manages the objects a
1
,a
2
, ..., a n. The server provides two operations for
its clients:
read(i) returns the value of a i
write(i, Value) assigns Value to a i
The transactions T and U are defined as follows:
T: x = read(i); write(j, 44);
U:write(i, 55); write(j, 66);
Describe an interleaving of the transactions T and U in which locks are released early
with the effect that the interleaving is not serially equivalent. page 693
16.9 The transactionsT and U at the server in Exercise 16.8 are defined as follows:
T: x = read(i); write(j, 44);
U:write(i, 55); write(j, 66);
Initial values of a i and a j are 10 and 20, respectively. Which of the following
interleavings are serially equivalent, and which could occur with two-phase locking?
(a) T U (b) T U
x= read (i); x= read (i);
write(i, 55); write(j, 44);
write(j, 44); write(i, 55);
write(j, 66); write(j, 66);
(c) T U (d) T U
write(i, 55); write(i, 55);
write(j, 66); x= read (i);
x= read (i); write(j, 66);
write(j, 44); write(j, 44);
page 693
16.10 Consider a relaxation of two-phase locks in which read-only transactions can release
read locks early. Would a read-only transaction have consistent retrievals? Would the
objects become inconsistent? Illustrate your answer with the following transactions T
andU at the server in Exercise 16.8:
T:x = read (i); y= read(j);
U:write(i, 55); write(j, 66);
in which initial values of a i and a j are 10 and 20. page 690


===== page 742 =====
724 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
16.11 The executions of transactions are strict if read and write operations on an object are
delayed until all transactions that previously wrote that object have either committed or
aborted. Explain how the locking rules in Figure 16.16 ensure strict executions.
page 696
16.12 Describe how a non-recoverable situation could arise if write locks are released after the
last operation of a transaction but before its commitment. page 690
16.13 Explain why executions are always strict, even if read locks are released after the last
operation of a transaction but before its commitment. Give an improved statement of
rule 2 in Figure 16.16. page690
16.14 Consider a deadlock detection scheme for a single server. Describe precisely when
edges are added to and removed from the wait-for-graph.
Illustrate your answer with respect to the following transactions T,U and V at the
server of Exercise 16.8.
T U V
write(i, 66)
write(i, 55)
write(i, 77)
commit
WhenUreleases its write lock on a i, both T and V are waiting to obtain write locks on
it. Does your scheme work correctly if T (first come) is granted the lock before V? If your
answer is ‘No’, then modify your description. page 702
16.15 Consider hierarchic locks as illustrated in Figure 16.26. What locks must be set when an
appointment is assigned to a time slot in week w, day d, at time t? In what order should
these locks be set? Does the order in which they are released matter?
What locks must be set when the time slots for every day in week w are viewed? Can
this be done when the locks for assigning an appointment to a time slot are already set?
page 705
16.16 Consider optimistic concurrency control as applied to the transactions T and U defined
inExercise 16.9. Suppose that transactions T and Uare active at the same time as one
another. Describe the outcome in each of the following cases:
i) T’srequest to commit comes first and backward validation is used.
ii) U’s request to commit comes first and backward validation is used.
iii) T’s request to commit comes first and forward validation is used.
iv) U’s request to commit comes first and forward validation is used.
In each case describe the sequence in which the operations of T and U are performed,
remembering that writes are not carried out until after validation.
page 707


===== page 743 =====
EXERCISES 725
16.17 Consider the following interleaving of transactions T and U:
T U
openTransaction openTransaction
y = read(k);
write(i, 55);
write(j, 66);
commit
x = read(i);
write(j, 44);
The outcome of optimistic concurrency control with backward validation is that T will
be aborted because its read operation conflicts with U’swrite operation on a i, although
the interleavings are serially equivalent. Suggest a modification to the algorithm that
deals with such cases. page 707
16.18 Make a comparison of the sequences of operations of the transactions T and U of
Exercise 16.8 that are possible under two-phase locking (Exercise 16.9) and under
optimistic concurrency control (Exercise 16.16). page707
16.19 Consider the use of timestamp ordering with each of the example interleavings of
transactions T and U in Exercise 16.9. Initial values of a i and a j are 10 and 20,
respectively, and initial read and write timestamps are t . Assume that each transaction
0
opens and obtains a timestamp just before its first operation; for example, in (a) T and U
get timestamps t and t , respectively, where t <t <t . Describe in order of increasing
1 2 0 1 2
time the effects of each operation of T and U. For each operation, state the following:
i) whether the operation may proceed according to the write or read rule;
ii) when timestamps are assigned to transactions or objects;
iii) when tentative objects are created and when their values are set.
What are the final values of the objects and their timestamps? page 711
16.20 RepeatExercise 16.19 for the following interleavings of transactions T and U:
T U T U
openTransaction openTransaction
openTransaction openTransaction
write(i, 55); write(i, 55);
write(j, 66); write(j, 66);
x = read (i); commit
write(j, 44); x = read (i);
commit write(j, 44);
page 711


===== page 744 =====
726 CHAPTER 16 TRANSACTIONS AND CONCURRENCY CONTROL
16.21 RepeatExercise 16.20 using multiversion timestamp ordering.
page 715
16.22 In multiversion timestamp ordering, read operations can access tentative versions of
objects. Give an example to show how cascading aborts can happen if all read
operations are allowed to proceed immediately. page 715
16.23 What are the advantages and drawbacks of multiversion timestamp ordering in
comparison with ordinary timestamp ordering? page 715


===== page 745 =====
17
DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
17.1 Introduction
17.2 Flat and nested distributed transactions
17.3 Atomic commit protocols
17.4 Concurrency control in distributed transactions
17.5 Distributed deadlocks
17.6 Transaction recovery
17.7 Summary
This chapter introduces distributed transactions – those that involve more than one
server. Distributed transactions may be either flat or nested.
An atomic commit protocol is a cooperative procedure used by a set of servers
involved in a distributed transaction. It enables the servers to reach a joint decision as to
whether a transaction can be committed or aborted. This chapter describes the two-phase
commit protocol, which is the most commonly used atomic commit protocol.
The section on concurrency control in distributed transactions discusses how
locking, timestamp ordering and optimistic concurrency control may be extended for use
with distributed transactions.
The use of locking schemes can lead to distributed deadlocks. Distributed deadlock
detection algorithms are discussed in Section 17.5.
Servers that provide transactions include a recovery manager whose concern is to
ensure that the effects of transactions on the objects managed by a server can be
recovered when it is replaced after a failure. The recovery manager saves the objects in
permanent storage together with intentions lists and information about the status of each
transaction.
727


===== page 746 =====
728 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
17.1 Introduction
In Chapter 16, we discussed flat and nested transactions that accessed objects at a single
server. In the general case, a transaction, whether flat or nested, will access objects
located in several different computers. We use the term distributed transaction to refer
to a flat or nested transaction that accesses objects managed by multiple servers.
When a distributed transaction comes to an end, the atomicity property of
transactions requires that either all of the servers involved commit the transaction or all
of them abort the transaction. To achieve this, one of the servers takes on a coordinator
role, which involves ensuring the same outcome at all of the servers. The manner in
which the coordinator achieves this depends on the protocol chosen. A protocol known
as the ‘two-phase commit protocol’ is the most commonly used. This protocol allows
the servers to communicate with one another to reach a joint decision as to whether to
commit or abort.
Concurrency control in distributed transactions is based on the methods discussed
in Chapter 16. Each server applies local concurrency control to its own objects, which
ensures that transactions are serialized locally. But distributed transactions must also be
serialized globally. How this is achieved varies depending upon whether locking,
timestamp ordering or optimistic concurrency control is in use. In some cases, the
transactions may be serialized at the individual servers, but a cycle of dependencies
between the different servers may occur and a distributed deadlock arise.
Transaction recovery is concerned with ensuring that all the objects involved in
transactions are recoverable. In addition to that, it guarantees that the values of the
objects reflect all the changes made by committed transactions and none of those made
by aborted ones.
17.2 Flat and nested distributed transactions
A client transaction becomes distributed if it invokes operations in several different
servers. There are two different ways that distributed transactions can be structured: as
flat transactions and as nested transactions.
In a flat transaction, a client makes requests to more than one server. For example,
inFigure 17.1(a), transaction T is a flat transaction that invokes operations on objects in
serversX,Y and Z. A flat client transaction completes each of its requests before going
on to the next one. Therefore, each transaction accesses servers’ objects sequentially.
When servers use locking, a transaction can only be waiting for one object at a time.
In a nested transaction, the top-level transaction can open subtransactions, and
each subtransaction can open further subtransactions down to any depth of nesting.
Figure 17.1(b) shows a client transaction T that opens two subtransactions, T and T ,
1 2
which access objects at servers X and Y. The subtransactions T and T open further
1 2
subtransactions T ,T ,T , and T , which access objects at servers M,N and P. In the
11 12 21 22
nested case, subtransactions at the same level can run concurrently, so T 1 and T 2 are
concurrent, and as they invoke objects in different servers, they can run in parallel. The
four subtransactions T ,T ,T and T also run concurrently.
11 12 21 22


===== page 747 =====
SECTION 17.2 FLAT AND NESTED DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS 729
Figure 17.1 Distributed transactions
(a) Flat transaction (b) Nested transactions
X M
T
11
X
Client T N
T 1
Y T
12
T T
T
21
Client T
2
Y
Z P
T
22
Consider a distributed transaction in which a client transfers $10 from account A
toC and then transfers $20 from B to D. Accounts A and B are at separate servers X and
Y and accounts C and D are at server Z. If this transaction is structured as a set of four
nested transactions, as shown in Figure 17.2, the four requests (two deposits and two
withdraws) can run in parallel and the overall effect can be achieved with better
performance than a simple transaction in which the four operations are invoked
sequentially.
Figure 17.2 Nested banking transaction
X
Client T A a.withdraw(10)
1
T
T = openTransaction
Y
openSubTransaction
a.withdraw(10);
T 2 B b.withdraw(20)
openSubTransaction
b.withdraw(20);
openSubTransaction Z
c.deposit(10);
openSubTransaction T 3 C c.deposit(10)
d.deposit(20);
closeTransaction T 4 D d.deposit(20)


===== page 748 =====
730 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.3 A distributed banking transaction
coordinator
join
participant
openTransaction
closeTransaction A a.withdraw(4);
..
join
BranchX
T
participant
b.withdraw(T, 3);
Client B b.withdraw(3);
T = openTransaction
a.withdraw(4); join BranchY
c.deposit(4);
b.withdraw(3); participant
d.deposit(3); c.deposit(4);
C
closeTransaction
D d.deposit(3);
BranchZ
Note: the coordinator is in one of the servers, e.g., BranchX
17.2.1 The coordinator of a distributed transaction
Servers that execute requests as part of a distributed transaction need to be able to
communicate with one another to coordinate their actions when the transaction commits.
A client starts a transaction by sending an openTransaction request to a coordinator in
any server, as described in Section 16.2. The coordinator that is contacted carries out the
openTransaction and returns the resulting transaction identifier (TID) to the client.
Transaction identifiers for distributed transactions must be unique within a distributed
system. A simple way to achieve this is for a TID to contain two parts: the identifier (for
example, an IP address) of the server that created it and a number unique to the server.
The coordinator that opened the transaction becomes the coordinator for the
distributed transaction and at the end is responsible for committing or aborting it. Each
of the servers that manages an object accessed by a transaction is a participant in the
transaction and provides an object we call the participant. Each participant is
responsible for keeping track of all of the recoverable objects at that server that are
involved, in the transaction. The participants are responsible for cooperating with the
coordinator in carrying out the commit protocol.
During the progress of the transaction, the coordinator records a list of references
to the participants, and each participant records a reference to the coordinator.
The interface for Coordinator shown in Figure 13.3 provides an additional
method, join, which is used whenever a new participant joins the transaction:
join(Trans, reference to participant)
Informs a coordinator that a new participant has joined the transaction Trans.


===== page 749 =====
SECTION 17.3 ATOMIC COMMIT PROTOCOLS 731
The coordinator records the new participant in its participant list. The fact that the
coordinator knows all the participants and each participant knows the coordinator will
enable them to collect the information that will be needed at commit time.
Figure 17.3 shows a client whose (flat) banking transaction involves accounts A,
B, C and D at servers BranchX, BranchY and BranchZ. The client’s transaction, T,
transfers $4 from account A to account C and then transfers $3 from account B to
account D. The transaction described on the left is expanded to show that
openTransaction and closeTransaction are directed to the coordinator, which would be
situated in one of the servers involved in the transaction. Each server is shown with a
participant, which joins the transaction by invoking the join method in the coordinator.
When the client invokes one of the methods in the transaction, for example
b.withdraw(T, 3), the object receiving the invocation (B at BranchY, in this case)
informs its participant object that the object belongs to the transaction T. If it has not
already informed the coordinator, the participant object uses the join operation to do so.
In this example, we show the transaction identifier being passed as an additional
argument so that the recipient can pass it on to the coordinator. By the time the client
callscloseTransaction, the coordinator has references to all of the participants.
Note that it is possible for a participant to call abortTransaction in the coordinator
if for some reason it is unable to continue with the transaction.
17.3 Atomic commit protocols
Transaction commit protocols were devised in the early 1970s, and the two-phase
commit protocol appeared in Gray [1978]. The atomicity property of transactions
requires that when a distributed transaction comes to an end, either all of its operations
are carried out or none of them. In the case of a distributed transaction, the client has
requested operations at more than one server. A transaction comes to an end when the
client requests that it be committed or aborted. A simple way to complete the transaction
in an atomic manner is for the coordinator to communicate the commit or abort request
to all of the participants in the transaction and to keep on repeating the request until all
of them have acknowledged that they have carried it out. This is an example of a one-
phase atomic commit protocol.
This simple one-phase atomic commit protocol is inadequate, though, because it
does not allow a server to make a unilateral decision to abort a transaction when the
client requests a commit. Reasons that prevent a server from being able to commit its
part of a transaction generally relate to issues of concurrency control. For example, if
locking is in use, the resolution of a deadlock can lead to the aborting of a transaction
without the client being aware unless it makes another request to the server. Also if
optimistic concurrency control is in use, the failure of validation at a server would cause
it to decide to abort the transaction. Finally, the coordinator may not know if a server has
crashed and been replaced during the progress of a distributed transaction – such a server
will need to abort the transaction.


===== page 750 =====
732 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
The two-phase commit protocol is designed to allow any participant to abort its
part of a transaction. Due to the requirement for atomicity, if one part of a transaction is
aborted, then the whole transaction must be aborted. In the first phase of the protocol,
each participant votes for the transaction to be committed or aborted. Once a participant
has voted to commit a transaction, it is not allowed to abort it. Therefore, before a
participant votes to commit a transaction, it must ensure that it will eventually be able to
carry out its part of the commit protocol, even if it fails and is replaced in the interim. A
participant in a transaction is said to be in a prepared state for a transaction if it will
eventually be able to commit it. To make sure of this, each participant saves in
permanent storage all of the objects that it has altered in the transaction, together with
its status – prepared.
In the second phase of the protocol, every participant in the transaction carries out
the joint decision. If any one participant votes to abort, then the decision must be to abort
the transaction. If all the participants vote to commit, then the decision is to commit the
transaction.
The problem is to ensure that all of the participants vote and that they all reach the
same decision. This is fairly simple if no errors occur, but the protocol must work
correctly even when some of the servers fail, messages are lost or servers are temporarily
unable to communicate with one another.
Failure model for the commit protocols • Section 16.1.2 presents a failure model for
transactions that applies equally to the two-phase (or any other) commit protocol.
Commit protocols are designed to work in an asynchronous system in which servers
may crash and messages may be lost. It is assumed that an underlying request-reply
protocol removes corrupt and duplicated messages. There are no Byzantine faults –
servers either crash or obey the messages they are sent.
The two-phase commit protocol is an example of a protocol for reaching a
consensus. Chapter 15 asserts that consensus cannot be reached in an asynchronous
system if processes sometimes fail. However, the two-phase commit protocol does reach
consensus under those conditions. This is because crash failures of processes are masked
by replacing a crashed process with a new process whose state is set from information
saved in permanent storage and information held by other processes.
17.3.1 The two-phase commit protocol
During the progress of a transaction, there is no communication between the coordinator
and the participants apart from the participants informing the coordinator when they join
the transaction. A client’s request to commit (or abort) a transaction is directed to the
coordinator. If the client requests abortTransaction, or if the transaction is aborted by
one of the participants, the coordinator informs all participants immediately. It is when
the client asks the coordinator to commit the transaction that the two-phase commit
protocol comes into use.
In the first phase of the two-phase commit protocol the coordinator asks all the
participants if they are prepared to commit; in the second, it tells them to commit (or
abort) the transaction. If a participant can commit its part of a transaction, it will agree
as soon as it has recorded the changes it has made (to the objects) and its status in


===== page 751 =====
SECTION 17.3 ATOMIC COMMIT PROTOCOLS 733
Figure 17.4 Operations for two-phase commit protocol
canCommit?(trans)(cid:111) Yes / No
Call from coordinator to participant to ask whether it can commit a transaction.
Participant replies with its vote.
doCommit(trans)
Call from coordinator to participant to tell participant to commit its part of a
transaction.
doAbort(trans)
Call from coordinator to participant to tell participant to abort its part of a transaction.
haveCommitted(trans, participant)
Call from participant to coordinator to confirm that it has committed the transaction.
getDecision(trans) (cid:111) Yes / No
Call from participant to coordinator to ask for the decision on a transaction when it
has voted Yes but has still had no reply after some delay. Used to recover from server
crash or delayed messages.
permanent storage and is therefore prepared to commit. The coordinator in a distributed
transaction communicates with the participants to carry out the two-phase commit
protocol by means of the operations summarized in Figure 17.4. The methods
canCommit,doCommit and doAbort are methods in the interface of the participant. The
methods haveCommitted and getDecision are in the coordinator interface.
The two-phase commit protocol consists of a voting phase and a completion
phase, as shown in Figure 17.5. By the end of step 2, the coordinator and all the
participants that voted Yes are prepared to commit. By the end of step 3, the transaction
is effectively completed. At step 3a the coordinator and the participants are committed,
so the coordinator can report a decision to commit to the client. At 3b the coordinator
reports a decision to abort to the client.
At step 4 participants confirm that they have committed so that the coordinator
knows when the information it has recorded about the transaction is no longer needed.
This apparently straightforward protocol could fail due to one or more of the
servers crashing or due to a breakdown in communication between the servers. To deal
with the possibility of crashing, each server saves information relating to the two-phase
commit protocol in permanent storage. This information can be retrieved by a new
process that is started to replace a crashed server. The recovery aspects of distributed
transactions are discussed in Section 17.6.
The exchange of information between the coordinator and participants can fail
when one of the servers crashes, or when messages are lost. Timeouts are used to avoid
processes blocking forever. When a timeout occurs at a process, it must take an
appropriate action. To allow for this the protocol includes a timeout action for each step
at which a process may block. These actions are designed to allow for the fact that in an
asynchronous system, a timeout may not necessarily imply that a server has failed.


===== page 752 =====
734 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.5 The two-phase commit protocol
Phase 1 (voting phase):
1. The coordinator sends a canCommit? request to each of the participants in the
transaction.
2. When a participant receives a canCommit? request it replies with its vote (Yes or
No) to the coordinator. Before voting Yes, it prepares to commit by saving objects
in permanent storage. If the vote is No, the participant aborts immediately.
Phase 2 (completion according to outcome of vote):
3. The coordinator collects the votes (including its own).
(a)If there are no failures and all the votes are Yes, the coordinator decides to
commit the transaction and sends a doCommit request to each of the
participants.
(b)Otherwise, the coordinator decides to abort the transaction and sends doAbort
requests to all participants that voted Yes.
4. Participants that voted Yes are waiting for a doCommit or doAbort request from
the coordinator. When a participant receives one of these messages it acts
accordingly and, in the case of commit, makes a haveCommitted call as
confirmation to the coordinator.
Timeout actionsinthetwo-phasecommitprotocol • There are various stages in the
protocol at which the coordinator or a participant cannot progress its part of the protocol
until it receives another request or reply from one of the others.
Consider first the situation where a participant has voted Yes and is waiting for the
coordinator to report on the outcome of the vote by telling it to commit or abort the
transaction (step 2 in Figure 17.6
Figure 17.6 Communication in two-phase commit protocol
canCommit?
Y e s
doCommit
h a v e C o m m etti d
). Such a participant is uncertain of the outcome and
cannot proceed any further until it gets the outcome of the vote from the coordinator.
The participant cannot decide unilaterally what to do next, and meanwhile the objects
Coordinator Participant
step status step status
1 prepared to commit
(waiting for votes) 2 prepared to commit
3 committed (uncertain)
4 committed
done


===== page 753 =====
SECTION 17.3 ATOMIC COMMIT PROTOCOLS 735
used by its transaction cannot be released for use by other transactions. The participant
can make a getDecision request to the coordinator to determine the outcome of the
transaction. When it gets the reply, it continues the protocol at step 4 in Figure 17.5. If
the coordinator has failed, the participant will not be able to get the decision until the
coordinator is replaced, which can result in extensive delays for participants in the
uncertain state.
Alternative strategies are available for the participants to obtain a decision
cooperatively instead of contacting the coordinator. These strategies have the advantage
that they may be used when the coordinator has failed. See Exercise 17.5 and Bernstein
et al. [1987] for details. However, even with a cooperative protocol, if all the
participants are in the uncertain state, they will be unable to get a decision until the
coordinator or a participant with the necessary knowledge is available.
Another point at which a participant may be delayed is when it has carried out all
its client requests in the transaction but has not yet received a canCommit? call from the
coordinator. As the client sends the closeTransaction to the coordinator, a participant
can only detect such a situation if it notices that it has not had a request in a particular
transaction for a long time – for example, by the time a timeout period on a lock expires.
As no decision has been made at this stage, the participant can decide to abort
unilaterally.
The coordinator may be delayed when it is waiting for votes from the participants.
As it has not yet decided the fate of the transaction it may decide to abort the transaction
after some period of time. It must then announce doAbort to the participants who have
already sent their votes. Some tardy participants may try to vote Yes after this, but their
votes will be ignored and they will enter the uncertain state as described above.
Performanceofthetwo-phasecommit protocol • Provided that all goes well – that is,
that the coordinator, the participants and the communications between them do not fail
– the two-phase commit protocol involving N participants can be completed with N
canCommit? messages and replies, followed by N doCommit messages. That is, the cost
in messages is proportional to 3N, and the cost in time is three rounds of messages. The
haveCommitted messages are not counted in the estimated cost of the protocol, which
can function correctly without them – their role is to enable servers to delete stale
coordinator information.
In the worst case, there may be arbitrarily many server and communication
failures during the two-phase commit protocol. However, the protocol is designed to
tolerate a succession of failures (server crashes or lost messages) and is guaranteed to
complete eventually, although it is not possible to specify a time limit within which it
will be completed.
As noted in the preceding section, the two-phase commit protocol can cause
considerable delays to participants in the uncertain state. These delays occur when the
coordinator has failed and cannot reply to getDecision requests from participants. Even
if a cooperative protocol allows participants to make getDecision requests to other
participants, delays will occur if all the active participants are uncertain.
Three-phase commit protocols have been designed to alleviate such delays, but
they are more expensive in terms of the number of messages and the number of rounds
required for the normal (failure-free) case. For a description of three-phase commit
protocols, see Exercise 17.2 and Bernstein et al. [1987].


===== page 754 =====
736 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.7 Operations in coordinator for nested transactions
openSubTransaction(trans) (cid:111) subTrans
Opens a new subtransaction whose parent is trans and returns a unique
subtransaction identifier.
getStatus(trans)(cid:111) committed, aborted, provisional
Asks the coordinator to report on the status of the transaction trans. Returns values
representing one of the following: committed,aborted or provisional.
17.3.2 Two-phase commit protocol for nested transactions
The outermost transaction in a set of nested transactions is called the top-level
transaction. Transactions other than the top-level transaction are called subtransactions.
In Figure 17.1(b), T is the top-level transaction and T , T , T , T , T and T are
1 2 11 12 21 22
subtransactions. T andT are child transactions of T, which is referred to as their parent.
1 2
Similarly, T and T are child transactions of T , and T and T are child transactions
11 12 1 21 22
ofT . Each subtransaction starts after its parent and finishes before it. Thus, for example,
2
T and T start after T and finish before it.
11 12 1
When a subtransaction completes, it makes an independent decision either to
commit provisionally or to abort. A provisional commit is different from being prepared
to commit: nothing is backed up in permanent storage. If the server crashes
subsequently, its replacement will not be able to commit. After all subtransactions have
completed, the provisionally committed ones participate in a two-phase commit
protocol, in which servers of provisionally committed subtransactions express their
intention to commit and those with an aborted ancestor will abort. Being prepared to
commit guarantees a subtransaction will be able to commit, whereas a provisional
commit only means it has finished correctly – and will probably agree to commit when
it is subsequently asked to.
A coordinator for a subtransaction will provide an operation to open a
subtransaction, together with an operation enabling that coordinator to enquire whether
its parent has yet committed or aborted, as shown in Figure 17.7.
A client starts a set of nested transactions by opening a top-level transaction with
an openTransaction operation, which returns a transaction identifier for the top-level
transaction. The client starts a subtransaction by invoking the openSubTransaction
operation, whose argument specifies its parent transaction. The new subtransaction
automatically joins the parent transaction, and a transaction identifier for a
subtransaction is returned.
An identifier for a subtransaction must be an extension of its parent’s TID,
constructed in such a way that the identifier of the parent or top-level transaction of a
subtransaction can be determined from its own transaction identifier. In addition, all
subtransaction identifiers should be globally unique. The client makes a set of nested
transactions come to completion by invoking closeTransaction or abortTransaction on
the coordinator of the top-level transaction.
Meanwhile, each of the nested transactions carries out its operations. When they
are finished, the server managing a subtransaction records information as to whether the


===== page 755 =====
SECTION 17.3 ATOMIC COMMIT PROTOCOLS 737
Figure 17.8 Transaction T decides whether to commit
T abort (at M)
11
T provisional commit (at X)
1
T T provisional commit (at N)
12
T provisional commit (at N)
21
T aborted (at Y)
2
T provisional commit (at P)
22
subtransaction committed provisionally or aborted. Note that if its parent aborts, then the
subtransaction will be forced to abort too.
Recall from Chapter 16 that a parent transaction – including a top-level transaction
– can commit even if one of its child subtransactions has aborted. In such cases, the
parent transaction will be programmed to take different actions according to whether a
subtransaction has committed or aborted. For example, consider a banking transaction
that is designed to perform all the ‘standing orders’ at a branch on a particular day. This
transaction is expressed as several nested Transfer subtransactions, each of which
consists of nested deposit and withdraw subtransactions. We assume that when an
account is overdrawn, withdraw aborts and then the corresponding Transfer aborts. But
there is no need to abort all the standing orders just because one Transfer subtransaction
aborts. Instead of aborting, the top-level transaction will note the Transfer
subtransactions that aborted and take appropriate actions.
Consider the top-level transaction T and its subtransactions shown in Figure 17.8,
which is based on Figure 17.1(b). Each subtransaction has either provisionally
committed or aborted. For example, T has provisionally committed and T has
12 11
aborted, but the fate of T depends on its parent T and eventually on the top-level
12 1
transaction, T. Although T and T have both provisionally committed, T has aborted
21 22 2
and this means that T and T must also abort. Suppose that T decides to commit in
21 22
spite of the fact that T has aborted, and that T decides to commit in spite of the fact that
2 1
T has aborted.
11
When a top-level transaction completes, its coordinator carries out a two-phase
commit protocol. The only reason for a participant subtransaction being unable to
complete is if it has crashed since it completed its provisional commit. Recall that when
each subtransaction was created, it joined its parent transaction. Therefore, the
coordinator of each parent transaction has a list of its child subtransactions. When a
nested transaction provisionally commits, it reports its status and the status of its
descendants to its parent. When a nested transaction aborts, it just reports abort to its
parent without giving any information about its descendants. Eventually, the top-level
transaction receives a list of all the subtransactions in the tree, together with the status
of each. Descendants of aborted subtransactions are omitted from this list.


===== page 756 =====
738 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.9 Information held by coordinators of nested transactions
Coordinator Child Participant Provisional Abort list
of transaction transactions commit list
T T , T yes T , T T , T
1 2 1 12 11 2
T T , T yes T , T T
1 11 12 1 12 11
T T , T no (aborted) T
2 21 22 2
T no (aborted) T
11 11
T , T T but not T * T , T
12 21 12 21 21 12
T no (parent aborted) T
22 22
*T ’s parent has aborted
21
The information held by each coordinator in the example in Figure 17.8 is shown
inFigure 17.9. Note that T and T share a coordinator as they both run at server N.
12 21
When subtransaction T aborted, it reported the fact to its parent, T, but without passing
2
on any information about its subtransactions T and T . A subtransaction is an orphan
21 22
if one of its ancestors aborts, either explicitly or because its coordinator crashes. In our
example, subtransactions T and T are orphans because their parent aborted without
21 22
passing information about them to the top-level transaction. Their coordinator can,
however, make enquiries about the status of their parent by using the getStatus
operation. A provisionally committed subtransaction of an aborted transaction should be
aborted, irrespective of whether the top-level transaction eventually commits.
The top-level transaction plays the role ofcoordinator in the two-phase commit
protocol, and the participant list consists of the coordinators of all the subtransactions in
the tree that have provisionally committed but do not have aborted ancestors. By this
stage, the logic of the program has determined that the top-level transaction should try
to commit whatever is left, in spite of some aborted subtransactions. In Figure 17.8, the
coordinators of T,T and T are participants and will be asked to vote on the outcome.
1 12
If they vote to commit, then they must prepare their transactions by saving the state of
the objects in permanent storage. This state is recorded as belonging to the top-level
transaction of which it will form a part. The two-phase commit protocol may be
performed in either a hierarchic manner or a flat manner.
The second phase of the two-phase commit protocol is the same as for the non-
nested case. The coordinator collects the votes and then informs the participants as to
the outcome. When it is complete, coordinator and participants will have committed or
aborted their transactions.
Hierarchic two-phase commit protocol • In this approach, the two-phase commit
protocol becomes a multi-level nested protocol. The coordinator of the top-level
transaction communicates with the coordinators of the subtransactions for which it is the
immediate parent. It sends canCommit? messages to each of the latter, which in turn
pass them on to the coordinators of their child transactions (and so on down the tree).
Each participant collects the replies from its descendants before replying to its parent.
In our example, T sends canCommit? messages to the coordinator of T and then T
1 1
sendscanCommit? messages to T asking about descendants of T . The protocol does
12 1
not include the coordinators of transactions such as T , which has aborted. Figure 17.10
2


===== page 757 =====
SECTION 17.3 ATOMIC COMMIT PROTOCOLS 739
Figure 17.10 canCommit? for hierarchic two-phase commit protocol
canCommit?(trans, subTrans) (cid:111) Yes / No
Call from coordinator to coordinator of child subtransaction to ask whether it can
commit a subtransaction subTrans. The first argument, trans, is the transaction
identifier of the top-level transaction. Participant replies with its vote, Yes / No.
shows the arguments required for canCommit?. The first argument is the TID of the top-
level transaction, for use when preparing the data. The second argument is the TID of
the participant making the canCommit? call. The participant receiving the call looks in
its transaction list for any provisionally committed transaction or subtransaction
matching the TID in the second argument. For example, the coordinator of T is also
12
the coordinator of T , since they run in the same server, but when it receives the
21
canCommit? call, the second argument will be T and it will deal only with T .
1 12
If a participant finds any subtransactions that match the second argument, it
prepares the objects and replies with a Yesvote. If it fails to find any, then it must have
crashed since it performed the subtransaction and it replies with a No vote.
Flat two-phase commit protocol • In this approach, the coordinator of the top-level
transaction sends canCommit? messages to the coordinators of all of the subtransactions
in the provisional commit list – in our example, to the coordinators of T and T . During
1 12
the commit protocol, the participants refer to the transaction by its top-level TID. Each
participant looks in its transaction list for any transaction or subtransaction matching
that TID. For example, the coordinator of T is also the coordinator of T ,since they
12 21
run in the same server (N).
Unfortunately, this does not provide sufficient information to enable correct
actions by participants such as the coordinator at server N that have a mix of
provisionally committed and aborted subtransactions. If N’s coordinator is just asked to
commit T it will end up by committing both T and T , because, according to its local
12 21
information, both have provisionally committed. This is wrong in the case of T ,
21
because its parent, T , has aborted. To allow for such cases, the canCommit? operation
2
for the flat commit protocol has a second argument that provides a list of aborted
subtransactions, as shown in Figure 17.11. A participant can commit descendants of the
top-level transaction unless they have aborted ancestors. When a participant receives a
canCommit? request, it does the following:
(cid:129) If the participant has any provisionally committed transactions that are
descendants of the top-level transaction, trans, it:
– checks that they do not have aborted ancestors in the abortList, then prepares
to commit (by recording the transaction and its objects in permanent storage);
Figure 17.11 canCommit?for flat two-phase commit protocol
canCommit?(trans, abortList) (cid:111) Yes / No
Call from coordinator to participant to ask whether it can commit a transaction.
Participant replies with its vote, Yes / No.


===== page 758 =====
740 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
– aborts those with aborted ancestors;
– sends a Yes vote to the coordinator.
(cid:129) If the participant does not have a provisionally committed descendent of the top-
level transaction, it must have failed since it performed the subtransaction and it
sends a Novote to the coordinator.
A comparison of the two approaches • The hierarchic protocol has the advantage that at
each stage, the participant only need look for subtransactions of its immediate parent,
whereas the flat protocol needs to have the abort list in order to eliminate transactions
whose parents have aborted. Moss [1985] preferred the flat algorithm because it allows
the coordinator of the top-level transaction to communicate directly with all of the
participants, whereas the hierarchic variant involves passing a series of messages down
and up the tree in stages.
Timeoutactions • The two-phase commit protocol for nested transactions can cause
the coordinator or a participant to be delayed at the same three steps as in the non-nested
version. There is a fourth step at which subtransactions can be delayed. Consider
provisionally committed child subtransactions of aborted subtransactions: they do not
necessarily get informed of the outcome of the transaction. In our example, T is such
22
a subtransaction – it has provisionally committed, but as its parent T has aborted, it does
2
not become a participant. To deal with such situations, any subtransaction that has not
received a canCommit? message will make an enquiry after a timeout period. The
getStatus operation in Figure 17.7 allows a subtransaction to enquire whether its parent
has committed or aborted. To make such enquiries possible, the coordinators of aborted
subtransactions need to survive for a period. If an orphaned subtransaction cannot
contact its parent, it will eventually abort.
17.4 Concurrency control in distributed transactions
Each server manages a set of objects and is responsible for ensuring that they remain
consistent when accessed by concurrent transactions. Therefore, each server is
responsible for applying concurrency control to its own objects. The members of a
collection of servers of distributed transactions are jointly responsible for ensuring that
they are performed in a serially equivalent manner.
This implies that if transaction T is before transaction U in their conflicting access
to objects at one of the servers, then they must be in that order at all of the servers whose
objects are accessed in a conflicting manner by both T and U.
17.4.1 Locking
In a distributed transaction, the locks on an object are held locally (in the same server).
The local lock manager can decide whether to grant a lock or make the requesting
transaction wait. However, it cannot release any locks until it knows that the transaction
has been committed or aborted at all the servers involved in the transaction. When
locking is used for concurrency control, the objects remain locked and are unavailable


===== page 759 =====
SECTION 17.4 CONCURRENCY CONTROL IN DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS 741
for other transactions during the atomic commit protocol, although an aborted
transaction releases its locks after phase 1 of the protocol.
As lock managers in different servers set their locks independently of one another,
it is possible that different servers may impose different orderings on transactions.
Consider the following interleaving of transactions T and U at servers X and Y:
T U
write(A) atX locksA
write(B) atY locks B
read(B) atY waits for U
read(A) atX waits for T
The transaction T locks object A at server X, and then transactionU locks object B at
server Y. After that, T tries to access B at server Y and waits for U’s lock. Similarly,
transaction U tries to access A at server X and has to wait for T’s lock. Therefore, we
haveT before U in one server and U before T in the other. These different orderings can
lead to cyclic dependencies between transactions, giving rise to a distributed deadlock
situation. The detection and resolution of distributed deadlocks is discussed in Section
17.5. When a deadlock is detected, a transaction is aborted to resolve the deadlock. In
this case, the coordinator will be informed and will abort the transaction at the
participants involved in the transaction.
17.4.2 Timestamp ordering concurrency control
In a single server transaction, the coordinator issues a unique timestamp to each
transaction when it starts. Serial equivalence is enforced by committing the versions of
objects in the order of the timestamps of transactions that accessed them. In distributed
transactions, we require that each coordinator issue globally unique timestamps. A
globally unique transaction timestamp is issued to the client by the first coordinator
accessed by a transaction. The transaction timestamp is passed to the coordinator at each
server whose objects perform an operation in the transaction.
The servers of distributed transactions are jointly responsible for ensuring that
they are performed in a serially equivalent manner. For example, if the version of an
object accessed by transaction U commits after the version accessed by T at one server,
ifT and U access the same object as one another at other servers they must commit them
in the same order. To achieve the same ordering at all the servers, the coordinators must
agree as to the ordering of their timestamps. A timestamp consists of a <local
timestamp, server-id> pair. The agreed ordering of pairs of timestamps is based on a
comparison in which the server-id part is less significant.
The same ordering of transactions can be achieved at all the servers even if their
local clocks are not synchronized. However, for reasons of efficiency it is required that
the timestamps issued by one coordinator be roughly synchronized with those issued by
the other coordinators. When this is the case, the ordering of transactions generally


===== page 760 =====
742 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
corresponds to the order in which they are started in real time. Timestamps can be kept
roughly synchronized by the use of synchronized local physical clocks (see Chapter 14).
When timestamp ordering is used for concurrency control, conflicts are resolved
as each operation is performed using the rules given in Section 16.6. If the resolution of
a conflict requires a transaction to be aborted, the coordinator will be informed and it
will abort the transaction at all the participants. Therefore any transaction that reaches
the client request to commit should always be able to commit, and participants in the
two-phase commit protocol will normally agree to commit. The only situation in which
a participant will not agree to commit is if it has crashed during the transaction.
17.4.3 Optimistic concurrency control
Recall that with optimistic concurrency control, each transaction is validated before it is
allowed to commit. Transaction numbers are assigned at the start of validation and
transactions are serialized according to the order of the transaction numbers. A
distributed transaction is validated by a collection of independent servers, each of which
validates transactions that access its own objects. This validation takes place during the
first phase of the two-phase commit protocol.
Consider the following interleavings of transactions T and U, which access objects
A and B at servers X and Y, respectively:
T U
read(A) atX read(B) atY
write(A) write(B)
read(B) atY read(A) atX
write(B) write(A)
The transactions access the objects in the order T beforeU at server X and in the order
U before T at server Y. Now suppose that T and U start validation at about the same time,
but server X validates T first and server Y validates U first. Recall that Section 16.5
recommends a simplification of the validation protocol that makes a rule that only one
transaction may perform validation and update phases at a time. Therefore each server
will be unable to validate the other transaction until the first one has completed. This is
an example of commitment deadlock.
The validation rules in Section 16.5 assume that validation is fast, which is true
for single-server transactions. However, in a distributed transaction, the two-phase
commit protocol may take some time to complete, and other transactions will be
prevented from entering validation until a decision on the current transaction has been
obtained. In distributed optimistic transactions, each server applies a parallel validation
protocol. This is an extension of either backward or forward validation to allow multiple
transactions to be in the validation phase at the same time. In this extension, rule 3 must
be checked as well as rule 2 for backward validation. That is, the write set of the
transaction being validated must be checked for overlaps with the write set of earlier
overlapping transactions. Kung and Robinson [1981] describe parallel validation.


===== page 761 =====
SECTION 17.5 DISTRIBUTED DEADLOCKS 743
If parallel validation is used, transactions will not suffer from commitment
deadlock. However, if servers simply perform independent validations, it is possible that
different servers in a distributed transaction may serialize the same set of transactions in
different orders – for example, with T before U at server X and U before T at server Y,
in our example.
The servers of distributed transactions must prevent this happening. One approach
is that after a local validation by each server, a global validation is carried out [Ceri and
Owicki 1982]. The global validation checks that the combination of the orderings at the
individual servers is serializable; that is, that the transaction being validated is not
involved in a cycle.
Another approach is that all of the servers of a particular transaction use the same
globally unique transaction number at the start of the validation [Schlageter 1982]. The
coordinator of the two-phase commit protocol is responsible for generating the globally
unique transaction number and passes it to the participants in the canCommit? messages.
As different servers may coordinate different transactions, the servers must (as in the
distributed timestamp ordering protocol) have an agreed order for the transaction
numbers they generate.
Agrawal et al. [1987] have proposed a variation of Kung and Robinson’s
algorithm that favours read-only transactions, together with an algorithm called MVGV
(multi-version generalized validation). MVGV is a form of parallel validation that
ensures that transaction numbers reflect serial order, but it requires that in some cases,
other transactions are unable to read their effects immediately after they have
committed. It also allows the transaction number to be changed so as to permit some
transactions to validate that otherwise would have failed. The paper also proposes an
algorithm for committing distributed transactions. It is similar to Schlageter’s proposal
in that a global transaction number has to be found. At the end of the read phase, the
coordinator proposes a value for the global transaction number and each participant
attempts to validate its local transactions using that number. However, if the proposed
global transaction number is too small, some participants may not be able to validate
their transactions, and they will have to negotiate with the coordinator for an increased
number. If no suitable number can be found, then those participants will have to abort
their transactions. Eventually, if all of the participants can validate their transactions, the
coordinator will have received proposals for transaction numbers from each of them. If
common numbers can be found then the transaction will be committed.
17.5 Distributed deadlocks
The discussion of deadlocks in Section 16.4 showed that deadlocks can arise within a
single server when locking is used for concurrency control. Servers must either prevent
or detect and resolve deadlocks. Using timeouts to resolve possible deadlocks is a
clumsy approach – it is difficult to choose an appropriate timeout interval, and
transactions may be aborted unnecessarily. With deadlock detection schemes, a
transaction is aborted only when it is involved in a deadlock. Most deadlock detection
schemes operate by finding cycles in the transaction wait-for graph. In a distributed
system involving multiple servers being accessed by multiple transactions, a global


===== page 762 =====
744 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.12 Interleavings of transactions U,V and W
U V W
d.deposit(10) lock D
b.deposit(10) lockB
a.deposit(20) lock A at Y
atX
c.deposit(30) lock C
b.withdraw(30) wait at Y atZ
c.withdraw(20) wait at Z
a.withdraw(20) wait at X
wait-for graph can in theory be constructed from the local ones. There can be a cycle in
the global wait-for graph that is not in any single local one – that is, there can be a
distributed deadlock. Recall that the wait-for graph is a directed graph in which nodes
represent transactions and objects, and edges represent either an object held by a
transaction or a transaction waiting for an object. There is a deadlock if and only if there
is a cycle in the wait-for graph.
Figure 17.12 shows the interleavings of the transactionsU,V and W involving the
objects A and B managed by servers X and Y and objects C and D managed by server Z.
The complete wait-for graph in Figure 17.13(a) shows that a deadlock cycle
consists of alternate edges, which represent a transaction waiting for an object and an
object held by a transaction. As any transaction can only be waiting for one object at a
time, objects can be left out of wait-for graphs, as shown in Figure 17.13(b).
Detection of a distributed deadlock requires a cycle to be found in the global
transaction wait-for graph that is distributed among the servers that were involved in the
transactions. Local wait-for graphs can be built by the lock manager at each server, as
discussed in Chapter 16. In the above example, the local wait-for graphs of the servers
are:
serverY:U(cid:111)V (added when U requests b.withdraw(30))
serverZ:V(cid:111)W (added when V requests c.withdraw(20))
serverX:W(cid:111)U (added whenW requests a.withdraw(20))
As the global wait-for graph is held in part by each of the several servers involved,
communication between these servers is required to find cycles in the graph.
A simple solution is to use centralized deadlock detection, in which one server
takes on the role of global deadlock detector. From time to time, each server sends the
latest copy of its local wait-for graph to the global deadlock detector, which
amalgamates the information in the local graphs in order to construct a global wait-for
graph. The global deadlock detector checks for cycles in the global wait-for graph.


===== page 763 =====
SECTION 17.5 DISTRIBUTED DEADLOCKS 745
Figure 17.13 Distributed deadlock
(a) (b)
W W
Waits for
Held by
C D A
Z X
V
Held
Waits Held by by
for
V U U
B Waits for
Held
by
Y
When it finds a cycle, it makes a decision on how to resolve the deadlock and tells the
servers which transaction to abort.
Centralized deadlock detection is not a good idea, because it depends on a single
server to carry it out. It suffers from the usual problems associated with centralized
solutions in distributed systems – poor availability, lack of fault tolerance and no ability
to scale. In addition, the cost of the frequent transmission of local wait-for graphs is
high. If the global graph is collected less frequently, deadlocks may take longer to be
detected.
Phantomdeadlocks • A deadlock that is ‘detected’ but is not really a deadlock is called
a phantom deadlock. In distributed deadlock detection, information about wait-for
relationships between transactions is transmitted from one server to another. If there is
a deadlock, the necessary information will eventually be collected in one place and a
cycle will be detected. As this procedure will take some time, there is a chance that one
of the transactions that holds a lock will meanwhile have released it, in which case the
deadlock will no longer exist.
Consider the case of a global deadlock detector that receives local wait-for graphs
from servers X and Y, as shown in Figure 17.14. Suppose that transaction U then releases
an object at server Xand requests the one held by V at server Y. Suppose also that the
global detector receives server Y’s local graph before server X’s. In this case, it would
detect a cycle T(cid:111)U(cid:111)V(cid:111)T, although the edge T(cid:111)U no longer exists. This is an
example of a phantom deadlock.
The observant reader will have realized that if transactions are using two-phase
locks, they cannot release objects and then obtain more objects, and phantom deadlock


===== page 764 =====
746 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.14 Local and global wait-for graphs
local wait-for graph local wait-for graph global deadlock detector
T
TT U VV T
U V
X Y
cycles cannot occur in the way suggested above. Consider the situation in which a cycle
T(cid:111)U(cid:111)V(cid:111)T is detected: either this represents a deadlock or each of the transactions
T,U and V must eventually commit. It is actually impossible for any of them to commit,
because each of them is waiting for an object that will never be released.
A phantom deadlock could be detected if a waiting transaction in a deadlock cycle
aborts during the deadlock detection procedure. For example, if there is a cycle
T(cid:111)U(cid:111)V(cid:111)T and U aborts after the information concerning U has been collected,
thenthe cycle has been broken already and there is no deadlock.
Edgechasing • A distributed approach to deadlock detection uses a technique called
edge chasing or path pushing. In this approach, the global wait-for graph is not
constructed, but each of the servers involved has knowledge about some of its edges.
The servers attempt to find cycles by forwarding messages called probes, which follow
the edges of the graph throughout the distributed system. A probe message consists of
transaction wait-for relationships representing a path in the global wait-for graph.
The question is, when should a server send out a probe? Consider the situation at
serverX in Figure 17.13. This server has just added the edge W(cid:111)Uto its local wait-for
graph, and at this time transaction U is waiting to access object B, which transaction V
holds at server Y. This edge could possibly be part of a cycle such as
V(cid:111)(cid:3)T 1(cid:3)(cid:111)(cid:3)T
2
(cid:111)…(cid:111)W(cid:111)U(cid:111)V involving transactions using objects at other
servers. This indicates that there is a potential distributed deadlock cycle, which could
be found by sending out a probe to server Y.
Now consider the situation a little earlier, when server Z added the edge V(cid:111)W
toits local graph. At this point in time W is not waiting, so there is no point in sending
out a probe.
Each distributed transaction starts at a server (called the coordinator of the
transaction) and moves to several other servers (called participants in the transaction),
which can communicate with the coordinator. At any point in time, a transaction can be
either active or waiting at just one of these servers. The coordinator is responsible for
recording whether the transaction is active or is waiting for a particular object, and
participants can get this information from their coordinator. Lock managers inform
coordinators when transactions start waiting for objects and when transactions acquire
objects and become active again. When a transaction is aborted to break a deadlock, its
coordinator will inform the participants and all of its locks will be removed, with the
effect that all edges involving that transaction will be removed from the local wait-for
graphs.


===== page 765 =====
SECTION 17.5 DISTRIBUTED DEADLOCKS 747
Figure 17.15 Probes transmitted to detect deadlock
W
W(cid:111)U(cid:111) V(cid:111)W Held by
Waits for
Deadlock
C
detected
A
Z
X
Initiation
W
Waits (cid:111)
for U (cid:111) W (cid:111) U
V
V
U
Held by Waits for
Y B
Edge-chasing algorithms have three steps:
Initiation: When a server notes that a transaction T starts waiting for another
transaction U, where U is waiting to access an object at another server, it initiates
detection by sending a probe containing the edge <T(cid:111)U> to the server of the
object at which transaction U is blocked. If U is sharing a lock, probes are sent to all
the holders of the lock. Sometimes further transactions may start sharing the lock
later on, in which case probes can be sent to them too.
Detection: Detection consists of receiving probes and deciding whether a deadlock
has occurred and whether to forward the probes.
For example, when a server of an object receives a probe <T(cid:111)U>
(indicating that T is waiting for a transaction U that holds a local object), it checks to
see whether U is also waiting. If it is, the transaction it waits for (for example, V) is
added to the probe (making it<T(cid:111)(cid:3)U(cid:3)(cid:111)V(cid:33)(cid:12)(cid:15) and if the new transaction (V) is
waiting for another object elsewhere, the probe is forwarded.
In this way, paths through the global wait-for graph are built one edge at a time.
Before forwarding a probe, the server checks to see whether the transaction (for
example,T) it has just added has caused the probe to contain a cycle (for example,
<T(cid:111)U(cid:111)V(cid:111)T>). If this is the case, it has found a cycle in the graph and a
deadlock has been detected.
Resolution: When a cycle is detected, a transactionin the cycle is aborted to break
the deadlock.


===== page 766 =====
748 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
In our example, the following steps describe how deadlock detection is initiated and the
probes that are forwarded during the corresponding detection phase:
(cid:129) Server X initiates detection by sending probe <W(cid:111)U> to the server of B (Server
Y).
(cid:129) Server Y receives probe <W(cid:111)U>, notes that B is held by V and appends V to
the probe to produce <W(cid:111)U(cid:111)V>. It notes that V is waiting for C at server Z.
This probe is forwarded to server Z.
(cid:129) Server Z receives probe <W(cid:111)U(cid:111)(cid:3)V>, notes C is held by W and appends W to
the probe to produce <W(cid:111)U(cid:111)V(cid:111)W>.
This path contains a cycle. The server detects a deadlock. One of the transactions in the
cycle must be aborted to break the deadlock. The transaction to be aborted can be chosen
according to transaction priorities, which are described shortly.
Figure 17.15 shows the progress of the probe messages from the initiation by the
server of A to the deadlock detection by the server of C. Probes are shown as heavy
arrows, objects as ovals (as usual) and transaction coordinators as rectangles. Each
probe is shown as going directly from one object to another. In reality, before a server
transmits a probe to another server, it consults the coordinator of the last transaction in
the path to find out whether the latter is waiting for another object elsewhere. For
example, before the server of B transmits the probe <W(cid:111)U(cid:111)V> it consults the
coordinator of V to find out that V is waiting for C. In most of the edge-chasing
algorithms, the servers of objects send probes to transaction coordinators, which then
forward them (if the transaction is waiting) to the server of the object for which the
transaction is waiting. In our example, the server of B transmits the probe
<W(cid:111)U(cid:111)V> to the coordinator of V, which then forwards it to the server of C. This
shows that when a probe is forwarded, two messages are required.
The above algorithm should find any deadlock that occurs, provided that waiting
transactions do not abort and there are no failures such as lost messages or servers
crashing. To understand this, consider a deadlock cycle in which the last transaction, W,
starts waiting and completes the cycle. When W starts waiting for an object, the server
initiates a probe that goes to the server of the object held by each transaction for which
W is waiting. The recipients extend and forward the probes to the servers of objects
requested by all waiting transactions they find. Thus every transaction that W waits for,
directly or indirectly, will be added to the probe unless a deadlock is detected. When
there is a deadlock, W is waiting for itself indirectly. Therefore, the probe will return to
the object that W holds.
It might appear that large numbers of messages are sent in order to detect
deadlocks. In the above example, we see two probe messages to detect a cycle involving
three transactions. Each of the probe messages is in general two messages (from object
to coordinator and then from coordinator to object).
A probe that detects a cycle involving N transactions will be forwarded by (N–1)
transaction coordinators via (N–1) servers of objects, requiring 2(N–1) messages.
Fortunately, the majority of deadlocks involve cycles containing only two transactions,
and there is no need for undue concern about the number of messages involved. This
observation has been made from studies of databases. It can also be argued by
considering the probability of conflicting access to objects (see Bernstein et al. [1987]).


===== page 767 =====
SECTION 17.5 DISTRIBUTED DEADLOCKS 749
Figure 17.16 Two probes initiated
(a) initial situation (b) detection initiated at object (c) detection initiated at object
requested by T requested by W
Waits for T Waits for T T(cid:111) U V (cid:111) T T W (cid:111)
(cid:111) (cid:3) V
W (cid:111)(cid:3)
V U
V U T (cid:111) W V T (cid:111)(cid:3)
U
U (cid:111) U
W Waits (cid:111) U W(cid:3)
W (cid:111) (cid:111)
for (cid:111) T V Waits
V W W for
Transactionpriorities • In the above algorithm, every transaction involved in a deadlock
cycle can cause deadlock detection to be initiated. The effect of several transactions in a
cycle initiating deadlock detection is that detection may happen at several different
servers in the cycle, with the result that more than one transaction in the cycle is aborted.
In Figure 17.16(a), consider transactions T,U,V and W, where U is waiting for W
andV is waiting for T. At about the same time, T requests the object held by U and W
requests the object held by V. Two separate probes, <T(cid:111)U(cid:3)> and <W(cid:111)V >, are
initiated by the servers of these objects and are circulated until deadlocks are detected
by each of the servers. In Figure 17.16(b), the cycle is <T(cid:111)(cid:3)U(cid:3)(cid:111)(cid:3)W(cid:111)V(cid:111)(cid:3)T(cid:3)(cid:33)(cid:15)(cid:3)and
inFigure 17.16 (c), the cycle is <W(cid:111)V(cid:111)T(cid:111)U(cid:111)W>.
In order to ensure that only one transaction in a cycle is aborted, transactions are
given priorities in such a way that all transactions are totally ordered. Timestamps, for
example, may be used as priorities. When a deadlock cycle is found, the transaction with
the lowest priority is aborted. Even if several different servers detect the same cycle,
they will all reach the same decision as to which transaction is to be aborted. We write
T>U to indicate that T has higher priority than U. In the above example, assume
T>U>V>W. Then the transaction W will be aborted when either of the cycles
<T(cid:111)U(cid:111)W(cid:111)V(cid:111)T > or <W(cid:111)V(cid:111)T(cid:111)U(cid:111)W> is detected.
It might appear that transaction priorities could also be used to reduce the number
of situations that cause deadlock detection to be initiated, by using the rule that detection
is initiated only when a higher-priority transaction starts to wait for a lower-priority one.
In our example in Figure 17.16, as T>U the initiating probe <T(cid:111)U> would be sent,
but as W<V the initiating probe <W(cid:111)V> would not be sent. If we assume that when
a transaction starts waiting for another transaction it is equally likely that the waiting
transaction has higher or lower priority than the waited-for transaction, then the use of
this rule is likely to reduce the number of probe messages by about half.
Transaction priorities could also be used to reduce the number of probes that are
forwarded. The general idea is that probes should travel ‘downhill’ – that is, from
transactions with higher priorities to transactions with lower priorities. To this end,
servers use the rule that they do not forward any probe to a holder that has higher priority
than the initiator. The argument for doing this is that if the holder is waiting for another
transaction, it must have initiated detection by sending a probe when it started waiting.


===== page 768 =====
750 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.17 Probes travel downhill
(a)V stores probe when U starts waiting (b)Probe is forwarded when V starts waiting
W WU (cid:111) V probe
Waits V(cid:111) W queue
U for C V
(cid:111)(cid:3) U
U
probe V Waits for V Waits for
queue U(cid:111) V B U(cid:111) V B
However, there is a pitfall associated with these apparent improvements. In our
example in Figure 17.15 transactions U,V and Ware executed in an order in which U is
waiting for V and Vis waiting for W when W starts waiting for U. Without priority rules,
detection is initiated when W starts waiting by sending a probe <W(cid:111)U>. Under the
priority rule, this probe will not be sent because W<U and the deadlock will not be
detected.
The problem is that the order in which transactions start waiting can determine
whether or not a deadlock will be detected. The above pitfall can be avoided by using a
scheme in which coordinators save copies of all the probes received on behalf of each
transaction in a probe queue. When a transaction starts waiting for an object, it forwards
the probes in its queue to the server of the object, which propagates the probes on
downhill routes.
In our example in Figure 17.15, when U starts waiting for V, the coordinator of V
will save the probe <U(cid:111)V>–see Figure 17.17(a). Then when V starts waiting for W,
the coordinator of W will store <V(cid:111)W> and V will forward its probe queue,
<U(cid:111)V>, to W. (SeeFigure 17.17(b), in which W’sprobe queue has <U(cid:111)V> and
<V(cid:111)W>.) When W starts waiting for A it will forward its probe queue,
<U(cid:111)V(cid:111)W>, to the server of A, which notes the new dependency W(cid:111)U and
combines it with the information in the probe received to determine that
U(cid:111)V(cid:111)(cid:3)W(cid:111)U. Deadlock is detected.
When an algorithm requires probes to be stored in probe queues, it also requires
arrangements to pass on probes to new holders and to discard probes that refer to
transactions that have been committed or aborted. If relevant probes are discarded,
undetected deadlocks may occur, and if outdated probes are retained, false deadlocks
may be detected. This adds much to the complexity of any edge-chasing algorithm.
Readers who are interested in the details of such algorithms should see Sinha and
Natarajan [1985] and Choudhary et al. [1989], who present algorithms for use with
exclusive locks. But they will see that Choudhary et al. showed that Sinha and
Natarajan’s algorithm is incorrect: it fails to detect all deadlocks and may even report
false deadlocks. Kshemkalyani and Singhal [1991] corrected the algorithm of
Choudhary et al. and provided a proof of correctness for the corrected algorithm. In a
subsequent paper, Kshemkalyani and Singhal [1994] argued that distributed deadlocks
are not very well understood because there is no global state or time in a distributed


===== page 769 =====
SECTION 17.6 TRANSACTION RECOVERY 751
system. In fact, any cycle that has been collected may contain sections recorded at
different times. In addition, sites may hear about deadlocks but may not hear that they
have been resolved until after random delays. The paper describes distributed deadlocks
in terms of the contents of distributed memory, using causal relationships between
events at different sites.
17.6 Transaction recovery
The atomic property of transactions requires that all the effects of committed
transactions and none of the effects of incomplete or aborted transactions are reflected
in the objects they accessed. This property can be described in terms of two aspects:
durability and failure atomicity. Durability requires that objects are saved in permanent
storage and will be available indefinitely thereafter. Therefore an acknowledgement of
a client’s commit request implies that all the effects of the transaction have been
recorded in permanent storage as well as in the server’s (volatile) objects. Failure
atomicity requires that effects of transactions are atomic even when the server crashes.
Recovery is concerned with ensuring that a server’s objects are durable and that the
service provides failure atomicity.
Although file servers and database servers maintain data in permanent storage,
other kinds of servers of recoverable objects need not do so except for recovery
purposes. In this chapter, we assume that when a server is running it keeps all of its
objects in its volatile memory and records its committed objects in a recovery file or
files. Therefore recovery consists of restoring the server with the latest committed
versions of its objects from permanent storage. Databases need to deal with large
volumes of data. They generally hold the objects in stable storage on disk with a cache
in volatile memory.
The requirements for durability and failure atomicity are not really independent
of one another and can be dealt with by a single mechanism – the recovery manager.
The tasks of a recovery manager are:
(cid:129) to save objects in permanent storage (in a recovery file) for committed
transactions;
(cid:129) to restore the server’s objects after a crash;
(cid:129) to reorganize the recovery file to improve the performance of recovery;
(cid:129) to reclaim storage space (in the recovery file).
In some cases, we require the recovery manager to be resilient to media failures.
Corruption during a crash, random decay or a permanent failure can lead to failures of
the recovery file, which can result in some of the data on the disk being lost. In such
cases we need another copy of the recovery file. Stable storage, which is implemented
so as to be very unlikely to fail by using mirrored disks or copies at a different location
may be used for this purpose.
Intentionslist • Any server that provides transactions needs to keep track of the
objects accessed by clients’ transactions. Recall from Chapter 16 that when a client
opens a transaction, the server first contacted provides a new transaction identifier and


===== page 770 =====
752 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.18 Types of entry in a recovery file
Type of entry Description of contents of entry
Object A value of an object.
Transaction identifier, transaction status (prepared, committed,
Transaction status aborted) and other status values used for the two-phase commit
protocol.
Transaction identifier and a sequence of intentions, each of which
Intentions list consists of <objectID,P>, where P is the position in the recovery
i i
file of the value of the object.
returns it to the client. Each subsequent client request within a transaction up to and
including the commit or abort request includes the transaction identifier as an argument.
During the progress of a transaction, the update operations are applied to a private set of
tentative versions of the objects belonging to the transaction.
At each server, an intentions list is recorded for all of its currently active
transactions – an intentions list of a particular transaction contains a list of the references
and the values of all the objects that are altered by that transaction. When a transaction
is committed, that transaction’s intentions list is used to identify the objects it affected.
The committed version of each object is replaced by the tentative version made by that
transaction, and the new value is written to the server’s recovery file. When a transaction
aborts, the server uses the intentions list to delete all the tentative versions of objects
made by that transaction.
Recall also that a distributed transaction must carry out an atomic commit protocol
before it can be committed or aborted. Our discussion of recovery is based on the two-
phase commit protocol, in which all the participants involved in a transaction first say
whether they are prepared to commit and later, if all the participants agree, carry out the
actual commit actions. If the participants cannot agree to commit, they must abort the
transaction.
At the point when a participant says it is prepared to commit a transaction, its
recovery manager must have saved both its intentions list for that transaction and the
objects in that intentions list in its recovery file, so that it will be able to carry out the
commitment later, even if it crashes in the interim.
When all the participants involved in a transaction agree to commit it, the
coordinator informs the client and then sends messages to the participants to commit
their part of the transaction. Once the client has been informed that a transaction has
committed, the recovery files of the participating servers must contain sufficient
information to ensure that the transaction is committed by all of the servers, even if some
of them crash between preparing to commit and committing.
Entriesinrecoveryfile • To deal with recovery of a server that can be involved in
distributed transactions, further information in addition to the values of the objects is
stored in the recovery file. This information concerns the status of each transaction –


===== page 771 =====
SECTION 17.6 TRANSACTION RECOVERY 753
whether it is committed,aborted or prepared to commit. In addition, each object in the
recovery file is associated with a particular transaction by saving the intentions list in the
recovery file. Figure 17.18 shows a summary of the types of entry included in a recovery
file.
The transaction status values relating to the two-phase commit protocol are
discussed in Section 17.6.4. We now describe two approaches to the use of recovery
files: logging and shadow versions.
17.6.1 Logging
In the logging technique, the recovery file represents a log containing the history of all
the transactions performed by a server. The history consists of values of objects,
transaction status entries and transaction intentions lists. The order of the entries in the
log reflects the order in which transactions have prepared, committed and aborted at that
server. In practice, the recovery file will contain a recent snapshot of the values of all the
objects in the server followed by a history of transactions postdating the snapshot.
During the normal operation of a server, its recovery manager is called whenever
a transaction prepares to commit, commits or aborts a transaction. When the server is
prepared to commit a transaction, the recovery manager appends all the objects in its
intentions list to the recovery file, followed by the current status of that transaction
(prepared) together with its intentions list. When a transaction is eventually committed
or aborted, the recovery manager appends the corresponding status of the transaction to
its recovery file.
It is assumed that the append operation is atomic in the sense that it writes one or
more complete entries to the recovery file. If the server fails, only the last write can be
incomplete. To make efficient use of the disk, several subsequent writes can be buffered
and then written to disk as a single write. An additional advantage of the logging
technique is that sequential writes to disk are faster than writes to random locations.
After a crash, any transaction that does not have a committed status in the log is
aborted. Therefore when a transaction commits, its committed status entry must be
forced to the log – that is, written to the log together with any other buffered entries.
The recovery manager associates a unique identifier with each object so that the
successive versions of an object in the recovery file may be associated with the server’s
objects. For example, a durable form of a remote object reference such as a CORBA
persistent reference will do as an object identifier.
Figure 17.19 illustrates the log mechanism for the banking service transactions T
and U in Figure 16.7. The log was recently reorganized, and entries to the left of the
double line represent a snapshot of the values of A,B and C before transactions T and U
started. In this diagram, we use the names A,B and C as unique identifiers for objects.
We show the situation when transaction T has committed and transaction U has prepared
but not committed. When transaction T prepares to commit, the values of objects A and
B are written at positions P and P in the log, followed by a prepared transaction status
1 2
entry for T with its intentions list (<A,P >, <B,P >). When transaction T commits, a
1 2
committed transaction status entry for T is put at position P . Then when transaction U
4
prepares to commit, the values of objects C and B are written at positions P and P in
5 6
the log, followed by a prepared transaction status entry for U with its intentions list
(<C,P 5>, <B,P 6>).


===== page 772 =====
754 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.19 Log for banking service
P P P P P P P P
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Object:A Object:B Object:C Object:A Object:B Trans:T Trans:T Object:C Object:B Trans:U
100 200 300 80 220 prepared committed 278 242 prepared
<A,P > <C,P >
1 5
<B,P > <B,P >
2 6
P P P
0 3 4
Checkpoint End
of log
Each transaction status entry contains a pointer to the position in the recovery file
of the previous transaction status entry to enable the recovery manager to follow the
transaction status entries in reverse order through the recovery file. The last pointer in
the sequence of transaction status entries points to the checkpoint.
Recoveryofobjects • When a server is replaced after a crash, it first sets default initial
values for its objects and then hands over to its recovery manager. The recovery manager
is responsible for restoring the server’s objects so that they include all the effects of the
committed transactions performed in the correct order and none of the effects of
incomplete or aborted transactions.
The most recent information about transactions is at the end of the log. There are
two approaches to restoring the data from the recovery file. In the first, the recovery
manager starts at the beginning and restores the values of all of the objects from the most
recent checkpoint (discussed in the next section). It then reads in the values of each of
the objects, associates them with their transaction’s intentions lists and for committed
transactions replaces the values of the objects. In this approach, the transactions are
replayed in the order in which they were executed and there could be a large number of
them. In the second approach, the recovery manager will restore a server’s objects by
‘reading the recovery file backwards’. The recovery file has been structured so that there
is a backwards pointer from each transaction status entry to the next. The recovery
manager uses transactions with committed status to restore those objects that have not
yet been restored. It continues until it has restored all of the server’s objects. This has
the advantage that each object is restored once only.
To recover the effects of a transaction, a recovery manager gets the corresponding
intentions list from its recovery file. The intentions list contains the identifiers and
positions in the recovery file of values of all the objects affected by the transaction.
If the server fails at the point reached in Figure 17.19, its recovery manager will
recover the objects as follows. It starts at the last transaction status entry in the log (at
P ) and concludes that transaction U has not committed and its effects should be
7
ignored. It then moves to the previous transaction status entry in the log (at P ) and
4
concludes that transaction T has committed. To recover the objects affected by
transaction T, it moves to the previous transaction status entry in the log (at P ) and finds
3


===== page 773 =====
SECTION 17.6 TRANSACTION RECOVERY 755
the intentions list for T (<A,P >,<B,P >). It then restores objects A and B from the
1 2
values at P and P . As it has not yet restored C, it moves back to P , which is a
1 2 0
checkpoint, and restores C.
To help with subsequent reorganization of the recovery file, the recovery manager
notes all the prepared transactions it finds during the process of restoring the server’s
objects. For each prepared transaction, it adds an aborted transaction status to the
recovery file. This ensures that in the recovery file, every transaction is eventually
shown as either committed or aborted.
The server could fail again during the recovery procedures. It is essential that
recovery be idempotent, in the sense that it can be done any number of times with the
same effect. This is straightforward under our assumption that all the objects are restored
to volatile memory. In the case of a database, which keeps its objects in permanent
storage with a cache in volatile memory, some of the objects in permanent storage will
be out of date when a server is replaced after a crash. Therefore the recovery manager
has to restore the objects in permanent storage. If it fails during recovery, the partially
restored objects will still be there. This makes idempotence a little harder to achieve.
Reorganizingtherecoveryfile • A recovery manager is responsible for reorganizing its
recovery file so as to make the process of recovery faster and to reduce its use of space.
If the recovery file is never reorganized, then the recovery process must search
backwards through the recovery file until it has found a value for each of its objects.
Conceptually, the only information required for recovery is a copy of the committed
version of each object in the server. This would be the most compact form for the
recovery file. The name checkpointing is used to refer to the process of writing the
current committed values of a server’s objects to a new recovery file, together with
transaction status entries and intentions lists of transactions that have not yet been fully
resolved (including information related to the two-phase commit protocol). The term
checkpoint is used to refer to the information stored by the checkpointing process. The
purpose of making checkpoints is to reduce the number of transactions to be dealt with
during recovery and to reclaim file space.
Checkpointing can be done immediately after recovery but before any new
transactions are started. However, recovery may not occur very often. Therefore,
checkpointing may need to be done from time to time during the normal activity of a
server. The checkpoint is written to a future recovery file, and the current recovery file
remains in use until the checkpoint is complete. Checkpointing consists of ‘adding a
mark’ to the recovery file when the checkpointing starts, writing the server’s objects to
the future recovery file and then copying to that file (1) all entries before the mark that
relate to as-yet-unresolved transactions and (2) all entries after the mark in the recovery
file. When the checkpoint is complete, the future recovery file becomes the recovery
file.
The recovery system can reduce its use of space by discarding the old recovery
file. When the recovery manager is carrying out the recovery process, it may encounter
a checkpoint in the recovery file. When this happens, it can immediately restore all
outstanding objects from the checkpoint.


===== page 774 =====
756 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.20 Shadow versions
Map at start Map when T commits
A(cid:111)P
0
A(cid:111)P
1
B(cid:111)P
0
' B(cid:111)P
2
C(cid:111)P
0
" C(cid:111)P
0
"
P 0 P 0 ' P 0 " P 1 P 2 P 3 P 4
Version store 100 200 300 80 220 278 242
Checkpoint
17.6.2 Shadow versions
The logging technique records transaction status entries, intentions lists and objects all
in the same file – the log. The shadow versions technique is an alternative way to
organize a recovery file. It uses a map to locate versions of the server’s objects in a file
called a version store. The map associates the identifiers of the server’s objects with the
positions of their current versions in the version store. The versions written by each
transaction are ‘shadows’ of the previous committed versions. As we shall see, the
transaction status entries and intentions lists are stored separately. Shadow versions are
described first.
When a transaction is prepared to commit, any of the objects changed by the
transaction are appended to the version store, leaving the corresponding committed
versions unchanged. These new as-yet-tentative versions are called shadow versions.
When a transaction commits, a new map is made by copying the old map and entering
the positions of the shadow versions. To complete the commit process, the new map
replaces the old map.
To restore the objects when a server is replaced after a crash, its recovery manager
reads the map and uses the information in the map to locate the objects in the version
store.
Figure 17.20 illustrates this technique with the same example involving
transactions T and U. The first column in the table shows the map before transactions T
and U, when the balances of the accounts A, B and C are $100, $200 and $300,
respectively. The second column shows the map after transaction T has committed.
The version store contains a checkpoint,followed by the versions of A and B at P
1
andP made by transaction T. It also contains the shadow versions of B and C made by
2
transaction U, at P and P .
3 4
The map must always be written to a well-known place (for example,at the start
of the version store or a separate file) so that it can be found when the system needs to
be recovered.
The switch from the old map to the new map must be performed in a single atomic
step. To achieve this it is essential that stable storage is used for the map, so that there is
guaranteed to be a valid map even when a file write operation fails. The shadow versions
method provides faster recovery than logging because the positions of the current
committed objects are recorded in the map, whereas recovery from a log requires


===== page 775 =====
SECTION 17.6 TRANSACTION RECOVERY 757
searching throughout the log for objects. Logging should be faster than shadow versions
during the normal activity of the system, though. This is because logging requires only
a sequence of append operations to the same file, whereas shadow versions require an
additional stable storage write (involving two unrelated disk blocks).
Shadow versions on their own are not sufficient for a server that handles
distributed transactions. Transaction status entries and intentions lists are saved in a file
called the transaction status file. Each intentions list represents the part of the map that
will be altered by a transaction when it commits. The transaction status file may, for
example, be organized as a log.
The figure below shows the map and the transaction status file for our current
example when T has committed and U is prepared to commit:
Transaction status file (stable storage)
Map T T U
A(cid:111)P
1
prepared committed prepared
B(cid:111)P
2
A(cid:111)P
1
B(cid:111)P
3
C(cid:111)P
0
" B(cid:111)P
2
C(cid:111)P
4
There is a chance that a server may crash between the time when a committed status is
written to the transaction status file and the time when the map is updated – in which
case the client will not have been acknowledged. The recovery manager must allow for
this possibility when the server is replaced after a crash, for example by checking
whether the map includes the effects of the last committed transaction in the transaction
status file. If it does not, then the latter should be marked as aborted.
17.6.3 The need for transaction status and intentions list entries in a recovery file
It is possible to design a simple recovery file that does not include entries for transaction
status items and intentions lists. This sort of recovery file may be suitable when all
transactions are directed to a single server. The use of transaction status items and
intentions lists in the recovery file is essential for a server that is intended to participate
in distributed transactions. This approach can also be useful for servers of non-
distributed transactions for various reasons, including the following:
(cid:129) Some recovery managers are designed to write the objects to the recovery file
early, under the assumption that transactions normally commit.
(cid:129) If transactions use a large number of big objects, the need to write them
contiguously to the recovery file may complicate the design of a server. When
objects are referenced from intentions lists, they can be found wherever they are.
(cid:129) In timestamp ordering concurrency control, a server sometimes knows that a
transaction will eventually be able to commit and acknowledges the client – at this
time, the objects are written to the recovery file (see Chapter 16) to ensure their
permanence. However, the transaction may have to wait to commit until earlier
transactions have committed. In such situations, the corresponding transaction
status entries in the recovery file will be waiting to commit and then committed to


===== page 776 =====
758 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
ensure timestamp ordering of committed transactions in the recovery file. On
recovery, any waiting-to-commit transactions can be allowed to commit, because
the ones they were waiting for will have either just committed or been aborted due
to failure of the server.
17.6.4 Recovery of the two-phase commit protocol
In a distributed transaction, each server keeps its own recovery file. The recovery
management described in the previous section must be extended to deal with any
transactions that are performing the two-phase commit protocol at the time when a
server fails. The recovery managers use two new status values for this purpose: done and
uncertain. These status values are shown in Figure 17.6. A coordinator uses committed
to indicate that the outcome of the vote is Yes and done to indicate that the two-phase
commit protocol is complete. A participant uses uncertain to indicate that it has voted
Yes but does not yet know the outcome of the vote. Two additional types of entry allow
a coordinator to record a list of participants and a participant to record its coordinator:
Type of entry Description of contents of entry
Coordinator Transaction identifier, list of participants
Participant Transaction identifier, coordinator
In phase 1 of the protocol, when the coordinator is prepared to commit (and has already
added a prepared status entry to its recovery file), its recovery manager adds a
coordinator entry to its recovery file. Before a participant can vote Yes, it must have
already prepared to commit (and must have already added a prepared status entry to its
recovery file). When it votes Yes, its recovery manager records a participant entry and
adds an uncertain transaction status to its recovery file as a forced write. When a
participant votes No, it adds an abort transaction status to its recovery file.
In phase 2 of the protocol, the recovery manager of the coordinator adds either a
committed or an aborted transaction status to its recovery file, according to the decision.
This must be a forced write (that is, it is written immediately to the recovery file).
Recovery managers of participants add a commit or abort transaction status to their
recovery files according to the message received from the coordinator. When a
coordinator has received a confirmation from all of its participants, its recovery manager
adds a done transaction status to its recovery file – this need not be forced. The done
status entry is not part of the protocol but is used when the recovery file is reorganized.
Figure 17.21 shows the entries in a log for transaction T, in which the server played the
coordinator role, and for transaction U, in which the server played the participant role.
For both transactions, the prepared transaction status entry comes first. In the case of a
coordinator it is followed by a coordinator entry and a committed transaction status
entry. The done transaction status entry is not shown in Figure 17.21. In the case of a
participant, the prepared transaction status entry is followed by a participant entry
whose state is uncertain and then a committedor aborted transaction status entry.


===== page 777 =====
SECTION 17.6 TRANSACTION RECOVERY 759
Figure 17.21 Log with entries relating to two-phase commit protocol
Trans:T Coord’r:T (cid:129) (cid:129)Trans:T Trans:U (cid:129) (cid:129)Part’pant:U Trans:U Trans:U
part’pant
prepared committed prepared Coord’r: . . .uncertain committed
list: . . .
intentions intentions
list list
When a server is replaced after a crash, the recovery manager has to deal with the
two-phase commit protocol in addition to restoring the objects. For any transaction
where the server has played the coordinator role, it should find a coordinator entry and
a set of transaction status entries. For any transaction where the server played the
participant role, it should find a participant entry and a set of transaction status entries.
In both cases, the most recent transaction status entry – that is, the one nearest the end
of the log – determines the transaction status at the time of failure. The action of the
recovery manager with respect to the two-phase commit protocol for any transaction
depends on whether the server was the coordinator or a participant and on its status at
the time of failure, as shown in Figure 17.22.
Reorganizationofrecoveryfile • Care must be taken when performing a checkpoint to
ensure that coordinator entries of transactions without status done are not removed from
the recovery file. These entries must be retained until all the participants have confirmed
that they have completed their transactions. Entries with status done may be discarded.
Participant entries with transaction state uncertain must also be retained.
Recoveryofnestedtransactions • In the simplest case, each subtransaction of a nested
transaction accesses a different set of objects. As each participant prepares to commit
during the two-phase commit protocol, it writes its objects and intentions lists to the
local recovery file, associating them with the transaction identifier of the top-level
transaction. Although nested transactions use a special variant of the two-phase commit
protocol, the recovery manager uses the same transaction status values as for flat
transactions.
However, abort recovery is complicated by the fact that several subtransactions at
the same and different levels in the nesting hierarchy can access the same object. Section
16.4 describes a locking scheme in which parent transactions inherit locks and
subtransactions acquire locks from their parents. The locking scheme forces parent
transactions and subtransactions to access common data objects at different times and
ensures that accesses by concurrent subtransactions to the same objects must be
serialized.
Objects that are accessed according to the rules of nested transactions are made
recoverable by providing tentative versions for each subtransaction. The relationship
between the tentative versions of an object used by the subtransactions of a nested
transaction is similar to the relationship between the locks. To support recovery from
aborts, the server of an object shared by transactions at multiple levels provides a stack
of tentative versions – one for each nested transaction to use.


===== page 778 =====
760 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Figure 17.22 Recovery of the two-phase commit protocol
Role Status Action of recovery manager
Coordinator prepared No decision had been reached before the server failed. It
sendsabortTransaction to all the servers in the participant
list and adds the transaction status aborted in its recovery
file. Same action for state aborted. If there is no participant
list, the participants will eventually time out and abort the
transaction.
Coordinator committed A decision to commit had been reached before the server
failed. It sends a doCommit to all of the participants in its
participant list (in case it had not done so before) and
resumes the two-phase protocol at step 4 (see Figure 17.5).
Participant committed The participant sends a haveCommitted message to the
coordinator (in case this was not done before it failed).
This will allow the coordinator to discard information
about this transaction at the next checkpoint.
Participant uncertain The participant failed before it knew the outcome of the
transaction. It cannot determine the status of the
transaction until the coordinator informs it of the decision.
It sends a getDecision to the coordinator to determine the
status of the transaction. When it receives the reply it will
commit or abort accordingly.
Participant prepared The participant has not yet voted and can abort the
transaction.
Coordinator done No action is required.
When the first subtransaction in a set of nested transactions accesses an object, it
is provided with a tentative version that is a copy of the current committed version of the
object. This is regarded as being at the top of the stack, but unless any of its
subtransactions access the same object, the stack will not materialize.
When one of its subtransactionsdoes access the same object, it copies the version
at the top of the stack and pushes it back onto the stack. All of that subtransaction’s
updates are applied to the tentative version at the top of the stack. When a subtransaction
provisionally commits, its parent inherits the new version. To achieve this, both the
subtransaction’s version and its parent’s version are discarded from the stack and then
the subtransaction’s new version is pushed back onto the stack (effectively replacing its
parent’s version). When a subtransaction aborts, its version at the top of the stack is
discarded. Eventually, when the top-level transaction commits, the version at the top of
the stack (if any) becomes the new committed version.


===== page 779 =====
SECTION 17.7 SUMMARY 761
Figure 17.23 Nested transactions
top of stack
T11
T1 A11 A11 A11 A12 A2 A2 A2
T T12 1 A1 A11 A12
T2
T1 T11 T12 T2
For example, in Figure 17.23, suppose that transactions T , T , T and T all
1 11 12 2
access the same object, A, in the order T ; T ; T ; T . Suppose that their tentative
1 11 12 2
versions are called A , A , A and A . When T starts executing, A is based on the
1 11 12 2 1 1
committed version of A and is pushed onto the stack. When T starts executing, it bases
11
its version A on A and pushes it onto the stack; when it completes, it replaces its
11 1
parent’s version on the stack. Transactions T and T act in a similar way, finally
12 2
leaving the result of T 2 at the top of the stack.
17.7 Summary
In the most general case, a client’s transaction will request operations on objects in
several different servers. A distributed transaction is any transaction whose activity
involves several different servers. A nested transaction structure may be used to allow
additional concurrency and independent committing by the servers in a distributed
transaction.
The atomicity property of transactions requires that the servers participating in a
distributed transaction either all commit it or all abort it. Atomic commit protocols are
designed to achieve this effect, even if servers crash during their execution. The two-
phase commit protocol allows a server to decide to abort unilaterally. It includes timeout
actions to deal with delays due to servers crashing. The two-phase commit protocol can
take an unbounded amount of time to complete but is guaranteed to complete eventually.
Concurrency control in distributed transactions is modular – each server is
responsible for the serializability of transactions that access its own objects. However,
additional protocols are required to ensure that transactions are serializable globally.
Distributed transactions that use timestamp ordering require a means of generating an
agreed timestamp ordering between the multiple servers. Those that use optimistic
concurrency control require global validation or a means of forcing a global ordering on
committing transactions.
Distributed transactions that use two-phase locking can suffer from distributed
deadlocks. The aim of distributed deadlock detection is to look for cycles in the global
wait-for graph. If a cycle is found, one or more transactions must be aborted to resolve
the deadlock. Edge chasing is a non-centralized approach to the detection of distributed
deadlocks.


===== page 780 =====
762 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
Transaction-based applications have strong requirements for the long life and
integrity of the information stored, but they do not usually have requirements for
immediate response at all times. Atomic commit protocols are the key to distributed
transactions, but they cannot be guaranteed to complete within a particular time limit.
Transactions are made durable by performing checkpoints and logging in a recovery
file, which is used for recovery when a server is replaced after a crash. Users of a
transaction service will experience some delay during recovery. Although it is assumed
that the servers of distributed transactions exhibit crash failures and run in an
asynchronous system, they are able to reach consensus about the outcome of
transactions because crashed servers are replaced with new processes that can acquire
all the relevant information from permanent storage or from other servers.
EXERCISES
17.1 In a decentralized variant of the two-phase commit protocol the participants
communicate directly with one another instead of indirectly via a coordinator. In phase
1, the coordinator sends its vote to all the participants. In phase 2, if the coordinator’s
vote is No, the participants just abort the transaction; if it is Yes, each participant sends
its vote to the coordinator and the other participants, each of which decides on the
outcome according to the vote and carries it out. Calculate the number of messages and
the number of rounds it takes. What are its advantages and disadvantages in comparison
with the centralized variant? page 732
17.2 A three-phase commit protocol has the following parts:
Phase 1: Is the same as for two-phase commit.
Phase 2: The coordinator collects the votes and makes a decision. If it is No, it
aborts and informs participants that voted Yes; if the decision is Yes, it sends a
preCommit request to all the participants. Participants that voted Yes wait for a
preCommit or doAbort request. They acknowledge preCommit requests and carry
out doAbort requests.
Phase 3: The coordinator collects the acknowledgements. When all are received,
itcommits and sends doCommit requests to the participants. Participants wait for
adoCommit request. When it arrives, they commit.
Explain how this protocol avoids delay to participants during their ‘uncertain’ period
due to the failure of the coordinator or other participants. Assume that communication
does not fail. page 735
17.3 Explain how the two-phase commit protocol for nested transactions ensures that if the
top-level transaction commits, all the right descendants are committed or aborted.
page 736
17.4 Give an example of the interleaving, of two transactions that is serially equivalent at
each server but is not serially equivalent globally. page 740


===== page 781 =====
EXERCISES 763
17.5 The getDecision procedure defined in Figure 17.4 is provided only by coordinators.
Define a new version of getDecision to be provided by participants for use by other
participants that need to obtain a decision when the coordinator is unavailable.
Assume that any active participant can make a getDecision request to any other
active participant. Does this solve the problem of delay during the ‘uncertain’ period?
Explain your answer. At what point in the two-phase commit protocol would the
coordinator inform the participants of the other participants’ identities (to enable this
communication)? page 732
17.6 Extend the definition of two-phase locking to apply to distributed transactions. Explain
how this is ensured by distributed transactions using strict two-phase locking locally.
page 740, Chapter 16
17.7 Assuming that strict two-phase locking is in use, describe how the actions of the two-
phase commit protocol relate to the concurrency control actions of each individual
server. How does distributed deadlock detection fit in? pages 732,740
17.8 A server uses timestamp ordering for local concurrency control. What changes must be
made to adapt it for use with distributed transactions? Under what conditions could it be
argued that the two-phase commit protocol is redundant with timestamp ordering?
pages 732,741
17.9 Consider distributed optimistic concurrency control in which each server performs local
backward validation sequentially (that is, with only one transaction in the validate and
update phase at one time), in relation to your answer to Exercise 17.4. Describe the
possible outcomes when the two transactions attempt to commit. What difference does
it make if the servers use parallel validation? Chapter 16, page 742
17.10 A centralized global deadlock detector holds the union of local wait-for graphs. Give an
example to explain how a phantom deadlock could be detected if a waiting transaction
in a deadlock cycle aborts during the deadlock detection procedure. page 745
17.11 Consider the edge-chasing algorithm (without priorities). Give examples to show that it
could detect phantom deadlocks. page 746
17.12 A server manages the objects a ,a , ... a . It provides two operations for its clients:
1 2 n
read(i) returns the value of a
i
write(i, Value) assigns Value to ai
The transactions T,U and V are defined as follows:
T: x = read(i); write(j, 44);
U:write(i, 55); write(j, 66);
V: write(k, 77); write(k, 88);
Describe the information written to the log file on behalf of these three transactions if
strict two-phase locking is in use and U acquires aianda jbefore T. Describe how the
recovery manager would use this information to recover the effects of T,U and V when
the server is replaced after a crash. What is the significance of the order of the commit
entries in the log file? pages 753–754
17.13 The appending of an entry to the log file is atomic, but append operations from different
transactions may be interleaved. How does this affect the answer to Exercise 17.12?
pages 753–754


===== page 782 =====
764 CHAPTER 17 DISTRIBUTED TRANSACTIONS
17.14 The transactions T, U and V of Exercise 17.12 use strict two-phase locking and their
requests are interleaved as follows:
T U V
x = read(i);
write(k, 77);
write(i, 55)
write(j, 44)
write(k,88)
write(j, 66)
Assuming that the recovery manager appends the data entry corresponding to each write
operation to the log file immediately instead of waiting until the end of the transaction,
describe the information written to the log file on behalf of the transactions T,U and V.
Does early writing affect the correctness of the recovery procedure? What are the
advantages and disadvantages of early writing? pages 753–754
17.15 TransactionsT andU are run with timestamp ordering concurrency control. Describe the
information written to the log file on behalf of T and U, allowing for the fact that U has
a later timestamp than T and must wait to commit after T. Why is it essential that the
commit entries in the log file be ordered by timestamps? Describe the effect of recovery
if the server crashes (i) between the two Commits; (ii) after both of them.
T U
x= read(i);
write(i, 55);
write(j, 66);
write(j, 44);
Commit
Commit
What are the advantages and disadvantages of early writing with timestamp ordering?(cid:3)
page 757
17.16 The transactions T and U in Exercise 17.15 are run with optimistic concurrency control
using backward validation and restarting any transactions that fail. Describe the
information written to the log file on their behalf. Why is it essential that the commit
entries in the log file be ordered by transaction numbers? How are the write sets of
committed transactions represented in the log file? pages 753–754
17.17 Suppose that the coordinator of a transaction crashes after it has recorded the intentions
list entry but before it has recorded the participant list or sent out the canCommit?
requests. Describe how the participants resolve the situation. What will the coordinator
do when it recovers? Would it be any better to record the participant list before the
intentions list entry? page 758


===== page 783 =====
18
REPLICATION
18.1 Introduction
18.2 System model and the role of group communication
18.3 Fault-tolerant services
18.4 Case studies of highly available services:
The gossip architecture, Bayou and Coda
18.5 Transactions with replicated data
18.6 Summary
Replication is a key to providing high availability and fault tolerance in distributed
systems. High availability is of increasing interest with the tendency towards mobile
computing and consequently disconnected operation. Fault tolerance is an abiding
concern for services provided in safety-critical and other important systems.
The first part of this chapter considers systems that apply a single operation at a
time to collections of replicated objects. It begins with a description of architectural
components and a system model for services that employ replication. We describe the
implementation of group membership management as part of group communication,
which is particularly important for fault-tolerant services.
The chapter then describes approaches to achieving fault tolerance. It introduces
the correctness criteria of linearizability and sequential consistency, then explores two
approaches: passive (primary-backup) replication, in which clients communicate with a
distinguished replica; and active replication, in which clients communicate by multicast
with all replicas.
Case studies of three systems for highly available services are considered. In the
gossip and Bayou architectures, updates are propagated lazily between replicas of shared
data. In Bayou, the technique of operational transformation is used to enforce
consistency. Coda is an example of a highly available file service.
The chapter ends by considering transactions – sequences of operations – upon
replicated objects. It considers the architectures of replicated transactional systems and
how these systems handle server failures and network partitions.
765


===== page 784 =====
766 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
18.1 Introduction
In this chapter, we study the replication of data: the maintenance of copies of data at
multiple computers. Replication is a key to the effectiveness of distributed systems in
that it can provide enhanced performance, high availability and fault tolerance.
Replication is used widely. For example, the caching of resources from web servers in
browsers and web proxy servers is a form of replication, since the data held in caches
and at servers are replicas of one another. The DNS naming service, described in
Chapter 13, maintains copies of name-to-attribute mappings for computers and is relied
on for day-to-day access to services across the Internet.
Replication is a technique for enhancing services. The motivations for replication
include:
Performance enhancement: The caching of data at clients and servers is by now
familiar as a means of performance enhancement. For example, Chapter 2 pointed
out that browsers and proxy servers cache copies of web resources to avoid the
latency of fetching resources from the originating server. Furthermore, data are
sometimes replicated transparently between several originating servers in the same
domain. The workload is shared between the servers by binding all the server IP
addresses to the site’s DNS name, say www.aWebSite.org. A DNS lookup of
www.aWebSite.org results in one of the several servers’ IP addresses being returned,
in a round-robin fashion (see Section 13.2.3). More sophisticated load-balancing
strategies are required for more complex services based on data replicated between
thousands of servers. As an example, Dilley et al. [2002] describe the approach to
DNS name resolution adopted in the Akamai content distribution network.
Replication of immutable data is trivial: it increases performance with little
cost to the system. Replication of changing data, such as that of the Web, incurs
overheads in the form of protocols designed to ensure that clients receive up-to-date
data (see Section 2.3.1). Thus there are limits to the effectiveness of replication as a
performance-enhancement technique.
Increased availability: Users require services to be highly available. That is, the
proportion of time for which a service is accessible with reasonable response times
should be close to 100%. Apart from delays due to pessimistic concurrency control
conflicts (due to data locking), the factors that are relevant to high availability are:
(cid:129) server failures;
(cid:129) network partitions and disconnected operation (communication disconnections
that are often unplanned and are a side effect of user mobility).
To take the first of these, replication is a technique for automatically maintaining the
availability of data despite server failures. If data are replicated at two or more
failure-independent servers, then client software may be able to access data at an
alternative server should the default server fail or become unreachable. That is, the
percentage of time during which the service is available can be enhanced by
replicating server data. If each of n servers has an independent probability p of failing


===== page 785 =====
SECTION 18.1 INTRODUCTION 767
or becoming unreachable, then the availability of an object stored at each of these
servers is:
n
1 – probability(all managers failed or unreachable) = 1–p
For example, if there is a 5% probability of any individual server failing over a given
time period and if there are two servers, then the availability is 1 – 0.052= 1 – 0.0025
= 99.75%. An important difference between caching systems and server replication
is that caches do not necessarily hold collections of objects such as files in their
entirety. So caching does not necessarily enhance availability at the application level
– a user may have one needed file but not another.
Network partitions (see Section 15.1) and disconnected operation are the
second factor that militate against high availability. Mobile users may deliberately
disconnect their computers or become unintentionally disconnected from a wireless
network as they move around. For example, a user on a train with a laptop may have
no access to networking (wireless networking may be interrupted, or they may have
no such capability). In order to be able to work in these circumstances – so-called
disconnected working or disconnected operation – the user will often prepare by
copying heavily used data, such as the contents of a shared diary, from their usual
environment to the laptop. But there is often a trade-off to availability during such a
period of disconnection: when the user consults or updates the diary, they risk
reading data that someone else has altered in the meantime. For example, they may
make an appointment in a slot that has since been occupied. Disconnected working
is only feasible if the user (or the application, on the user’s behalf) can cope with stale
data and can later resolve any conflicts that arise.
Fault tolerance: Highly available data is not necessarily strictly correct data. It may
be out of date, for example; or two users on opposite sides of a network partition may
make updates that conflict and need to be resolved. A fault-tolerant service, by
contrast, always guarantees strictly correct behaviour despite a certain number and
type of faults. The correctness concerns the freshness of data supplied to the client
and the effects of the client’s operations upon the data. Correctness sometimes also
concerns the timeliness of the service’s responses – such as, for example, in the case
of a system for air traffic control, where correct data are needed on short timescales.
The same basic technique used for high availability – that of replicating data
and functionality between computers – is also applicable for achieving fault
tolerance. If up to f of f+1 servers crash, then in principle at least one remains to
supply the service. And if up to f servers can exhibit Byzantine failures, then in
principle a group of 2f+1 servers can provide a correct service, by having the correct
servers outvote the failed servers (who may supply spurious values). But fault
tolerance is subtler than this simple description makes it seem. The system must
manage the coordination of its components precisely to maintain the correctness
guarantees in the face of failures, which may occur at any time.
A common requirement when data are replicated is for replication transparency. That
is, clients should not normally have to be aware that multiple physical copies of data
exist. As far as clients are concerned, data are organized as individual logical objects
and they identify only one item in each case when they request an operation to be
performed. Furthermore, clients expect operations to return only one set of values. This


===== page 786 =====
768 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
is despite the fact that operations may be performed upon more than one physical copy
in concert.
The other general requirement for replicated data – one that can vary in strength
between applications – is that of consistency. This concerns whether the operations
performed upon a collection of replicated objects produce results that meet the
specification of correctness for those objects.
We saw in the example of the diary that during disconnected operation data may
be allowed to become inconsistent, at least temporarily. But when clients remain
connected it is often not acceptable for different clients (using different physical copies
of data) to obtain inconsistent results when they make requests affecting the same
logical objects. That is, it is not acceptable if the results break the application’s
correctness criteria.
We now examine in more detail the design issues raised when we replicate data to
achieve highly available and fault-tolerant services. We also examine some standard
solutions and techniques for dealing with those issues. First, Sections 18.2 to 18.4 cover
the case where clients make individual invocations upon shared data. Section 18.2
presents a general architecture for managing replicated data and introduces group
communication as an important tool. Group communication is particularly useful for
achieving fault tolerance, which is the subject of Section 18.3. Section 18.4 describes
techniques for high availability, including disconnected operation. It includes case
studies of the gossip architecture, Bayou and the Coda file system. Section 18.5
examines how to support transactions on replicated data. As Chapters 16 and 17
explained, transactions are made up of sequences of operations, rather than single
operations.
18.2 System model and the role of group communication
The data in our system consist of a collection of items that we shall call objects. An
‘object’ could be a file, say, or a Java object. But each such logical object is
implemented by a collection of physical copies called replicas. The replicas are physical
objects, each stored at a single computer, with data and behaviour that are tied to some
degree of consistency by the system’s operation. The ‘replicas’ of a given object are not
necessarily identical, at least not at any particular point in time. Some replicas may have
received updates that others have not received.
In this section, we provide a general system model for managing replicas and then
describe the role of group communication systems in achieving fault tolerance through
replication, highlighting the importance of view-synchronous group communication.
18.2.1 System model
We assume an asynchronous system in which processes may fail only by crashing. Our
default assumption is that network partitions may not occur, but we shall sometimes
consider what happens if they do occur. Network partitions make it harder to build
failure detectors, which we use to achieve reliable and totally ordered multicast.


===== page 787 =====
SECTION 18.2 SYSTEM MODEL AND THE ROLE OF GROUP COMMUNICATION 769
Figure 18.1 A basic architectural model for the management of replicated data
Requests and
replies
RM
C FE RM
Clients Front ends Service
Replica
C FE
RM managers
For the sake of generality, we describe architectural components by their roles and
do not mean to imply that they are necessarily implemented by distinct processes (or
hardware). The model involves replicas held by distinct replica managers (seeFigure
18.1), which are components that contain the replicas on a given computer and perform
operations upon them directly. This general model may be applied in a client-server
environment,in which case a replica manager is a server. We shall sometimes simply
call them servers instead. Equally, it may be applied to an application and application
processes can in that case act as both clients and replica managers. For example, the
user’s laptop on a train may contain an application that acts as a replica manager for their
diary.
We shall always require that a replica manager applies operations to its replicas
recoverably. This allows us to assume that an operation at a replica manager does not
leave inconsistent results if it fails part way through. We sometimes require each replica
manager to be a state machine [Lamport 1978, Schneider 1990]. Such a replica manager
applies operations to its replicas atomically (indivisibly), so that its execution is
equivalent to performing operations in some strict sequence. Moreover, the state of its
replicas is a deterministic function of their initial states and the sequence of operations
that it applies to them. Other stimuli, such as the reading on a clock or an attached
sensor, have no bearing on these state values. Without this assumption, consistency
guarantees between replica managers that accept update operations independently could
not be made. The system can only determine which operations to apply at all replica
managers and in what order – it cannot reproduce non-deterministic effects. The
assumption implies that it may not be possible, depending upon the threading
architecture, for the servers to be multi-threaded.
Often each replica manager maintains a replica of every object, and we assume
this is so unless we state otherwise. However, the replicas of different objects may be
maintained by different sets of replica managers. For example, one object may be
needed mostly by clients on one network and another by clients on another network.
There is little to be gained by replicating them at managers on the other network.
The set of replica managers may be static or dynamic. In a dynamic system, new
replica managers may appear (for example, if a second secretary copies a diary onto their
laptop); this is not allowed in a static system. In a dynamic system, replica managers


===== page 788 =====
770 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
may crash, and they are then deemed to have left the system (although they may be
replaced). In a static system, replica managers do not crash (crashing implies never
executing another step), but they may cease operating for an indefinite period. We return
to the issue of failure in Section 18.4.2.
The general model of replica management is shown in Figure 18.1. A collection
of replica managers provides a service to clients. The clients see a service that gives
them access to objects (for example, diaries or bank accounts), which in fact are
replicated at the managers. Each client requests a series of operations – invocations upon
one or more of the objects. An operation may involve a combination of reads of objects
and updates to objects. Requested operations that involve no updates are called read-
only requests; requested operations that update an object are called update requests
(these may also involve reads).
Each client’s requests are first handled by a component called a front end. The role
of the front end is to communicate by message passing with one or more of the replica
managers, rather than forcing the client to do this itself explicitly. It is the vehicle for
making replication transparent. A front end may be implemented in the client’s address
space, or it may be a separate process.
In general, five phases are involved in the performance of a single request upon
the replicated objects [Wiesmannet al. 2000]. The actions in each phase vary according
to the type of system, as will become clear in the next two sections. For example, a
service that supports disconnected operation behaves differently from one that provides
a fault-tolerant service. The phases are as follows:
Request: The front end issues the request to one or more replica managers:
– either the front end communicates with a single replica manager, which in turn
communicates with other replica managers;
– or the front end multicasts the request to the replica managers.
Coordination: The replica managers coordinate in preparation for executing the
request consistently. They agree, if necessary at this stage, on whether the request is
to be applied (it might not be applied at all if failures occur at this stage). They also
decide on the ordering of this request relative to others. All of the types of ordering
defined for multicast in Section 15.4.3 also apply to request handling and we define
those orders again for this context:
FIFO ordering: If a front end issues request r and then request r(cid:99), any correct
replica manager that handles r(cid:99) handles r before it.
Causal ordering: If the issue of request r happened-before the issue of request r(cid:99),
then any correct replica manager that handles r(cid:99) handles r before it.
Total ordering: If a correct replica manager handles r before request r(cid:99), then any
correct replica manager that handles r(cid:99) handles r before it.
Most applications require FIFO ordering. We discuss the requirements for causal and
total ordering – and the hybrid orderings that are both FIFO and total, or both causal
and total – in the next two sections.
Execution: The replica managers execute the request – perhaps tentatively: that is, in
such a way that they can undo its effects later.


===== page 789 =====
SECTION 18.2 SYSTEM MODEL AND THE ROLE OF GROUP COMMUNICATION 771
Agreement: The replica managers reach consensus on the effect of the request – if
any – that will be committed. For example, in a transactional system the replica
managers may collectively agree to abort or commit the transaction at this stage.
Response: One or more replica managers responds to the front end. In some systems,
one replica manager sends the response. In others, the front end receives responses
from a collection of replica managers and selects or synthesizes a single response to
pass back to the client. For example, it could pass back the first response to arrive, if
high availability is the goal. If tolerance of Byzantine failures is the goal, then it could
give the client the response that a majority of the replica managers provides.
Different systems may make different choices about the ordering of the phases, as well
as their contents. For example, in a system that supports disconnected operation, it is
important to give the client (the application on the user’s laptop, say) as early a response
as possible. The user does not want to wait until the replica manager on the laptop and
the replica manager back in the office can coordinate. By contrast, in a fault-tolerant
system the client is not given the response until the end, when the correctness of the
result can be guaranteed.
18.2.2 The role of group communication
Chapter 6 introduced the concept of group communication and Section 15.4 expanded
on this discussion by covering algorithms for reliability and ordering of message
delivery in group communication systems. In this chapter, we look at the role of groups
in managing replicated data. The discussion in Section 15.4 took the membership of
groups to be statically defined, although group members may crash. In replication, and
indeed in many other practical circumstances, there is a strong requirement for dynamic
membership, in which processes join and leave the group as the system executes. In a
service that manages replicated data, for example, users may add or withdraw a replica
manager, or a replica manager may crash and thus need to be withdrawn from the
system’s operation. Group membership management, which was introduced in Section
6.2.2, is therefore particularly important in this context.
Systems that can adapt as processes join, leave and crash – fault-tolerant systems,
in particular – require the more advanced features of failure detection and notification
of membership changes. A full group membership service maintains group views, which
are lists of the current group members, identified by their unique process identifiers. The
list is ordered, for example, according to the sequence in which the members joined the
group. A new group view is generated each time that a process is added or excluded.
It is important to understand that a group membership service may exclude a
process from a group because it is Suspected, even though it may not have crashed. A
communication failure may have made the process unreachable, while it continues to
execute normally. A membership service is always free to exclude such a process. The
effect of exclusion is that no messages will be delivered to that process henceforth.
Moreover, in the case of a closed group, if that process becomes connected again, any
messages it attempts to send will not be delivered to the group members. That process
will have to rejoin the group (as a ‘reincarnation’ of itself, with a new identifier), or abort
its operations.


===== page 790 =====
772 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
A false suspicion of a process and the consequent exclusion of the process from
the group may reduce the group’s effectiveness. The group has to manage without the
extra reliability or performance that the withdrawn process could potentially have
provided. The design challenge, apart from designing failure detectors to be as accurate
as possible, is to ensure that a system based on group communication does not behave
incorrectly if a process is falsely suspected.
An important consideration is how a group management service treats network
partitions. Disconnection or the failure of components such as a router in a network may
split a group of processes into two or more subgroups, with communication between the
subgroups impossible. Group management services differ in whether they are primary-
partition or partitionable. In the first case, the management service allows at most one
subgroup (a majority) to survive a partition; the remaining processes are informed that
they should suspend operations. This arrangement is appropriate for cases where the
processes manage important data and the costs of inconsistencies between two or more
subgroups outweigh any advantage of disconnected working.
On the other hand, in some circumstances it is acceptable for two or more
subgroups to continue to operate – a partitionable group membership service allows this.
For example, in an application in which users hold an audio or video conference to
discuss some issues, it may be acceptable for two or more subgroups of users to continue
their discussions independently despite a partition. They can merge their results when
the partition heals and the subgroups are connected again.
Viewdelivery • Consider the task of a programmer writing an application that runs in
each process in a group and that must cope with new and lost members. The programmer
needs to know that the system treats each member in a consistent way when the
membership changes. It would be awkward if the programmer had to query the state of
all the other members and reach a global decision whenever a membership change
occurred, rather than being able to make a local decision on how to respond to the
change. The programmer’s life is made harder or easier according to the guarantees that
apply when the system delivers views to the group members.
For each group g the group management service delivers to any member process
p(cid:143)g a series of views v (cid:11)g(cid:12), v (cid:11)g(cid:12), v (cid:11)g(cid:12), etc. For example, a series of views could
0 1 2
be v (cid:11)g(cid:12) = (cid:11)p(cid:12), v (cid:11)g(cid:12) = (cid:11)p(cid:15)p(cid:99)(cid:12) and v (cid:11)g(cid:12) = (cid:11)p(cid:12) – p joins an empty group, then p(cid:99)
0 1 2
joins the group, then p(cid:99) leaves it. Although several membership changes may occur
concurrently, such as when one process joins the group just as another leaves, the system
imposes an order on the sequence of views given to each process.
We speak of a member delivering a view when a membership change occurs and
the application is notified of the new membership, just as we speak of a process
delivering a multicast message. As with multicast delivery, delivering a view is distinct
from receiving a view. Group membership protocols keep proposed views on a hold-
back queue until all extant members can agree to their delivery.
We also speak of an event as occurring in a viewv(g) at process pif, at the time
of the event’s occurrence, p has delivered v(g) but has not yet delivered the next view,
v(cid:99)(g).
Some basic requirements for viewdelivery are as follows:
Order: Ifa process p delivers view v(g) and then view v(cid:99)(g), then no other process
q(cid:143)p delivers v(cid:99)(g) before v(g).


===== page 791 =====
SECTION 18.2 SYSTEM MODEL AND THE ROLE OF GROUP COMMUNICATION 773
Integrity: If process p delivers view v(g), then p(cid:143)v(g).
Non-triviality: If process q joins a group and is or becomes indefinitely reachable
from process p(cid:143)q, then eventually q is always in the views that p delivers. Similarly,
if the group partitions and remains partitioned, then eventually the views delivered in
any one partition will exclude any processes in another partition.
The first of these requirements goes some way to giving the programmer a consistency
guarantee by ensuring that view changes always occur in the same order at different
processes. The second requirement is a ‘sanity check’. The third guards against trivial
solutions. For example, a membership service that tells every process, regardless of its
connectivity, that it is in a group all by itself is not of great interest. The non-triviality
condition states that if two processes that have each joined the same group can
eventually communicate indefinitely, then they should each be deemed members of that
same group. Similarly, it requires that, when a partition occurs, the membership service
should eventually reflect the partition. The condition does not state how the group
membership service should behave in the problematic case of intermittent connectivity.
View-synchronousgroupcommunication • A view-synchronous group communication
system makes guarantees additional to those above about the delivery ordering of view
notifications with respect to the delivery of multicast messages. View-synchronous
communication extends the reliable multicast semantics that we described in Chapter 15
to take account of changing group views. For the sake of simplicity, we restrict our
discussion to the case where partitions may not occur. The guarantees provided by view-
synchronous group communication are as follows:
Agreement: Correct processes deliver the same sequence of views (starting from the
view in which they join the group) and the same set of messages in any given view.
That is, if a correct process delivers message m in view v(g), then all other correct
processes that deliver m also do so in the view v(g).
Integrity: If a correct process p delivers message m, then it will not deliver m again.
Furthermore, p (cid:143) group(m) and the process that sent m is in the view in which p
delivers m.
Validity (closed groups): Correct processes always deliver the messages that they
send. If the system fails to deliver a message to any process q, then it notifies the
surviving processes by delivering a new view with q excluded, immediately after the
view in which any of them delivered the message. That is, let p be any correct process
that delivers message m in view v(g). If some process q(cid:143)v(g) does not deliver m in
view v(g),then the next view v(cid:99)(g) that p delivers has q(cid:144) v(cid:99)(g).
Consider a group with three processes, p,q and r (see Figure 18.2). Suppose that p sends
a message m while in view (p,q,r) but that p crashes soon after sending m, while q and
r are correct. One possibility is that p crashes before m has reached any other process.
In this case, q and reach deliver the new view (q,r), but neither ever delivers m (Figure
18.2a). The other possibility is that m has reached at least one of the two surviving
processes when p crashes. Then q and r both deliver first m and then the view (q, r)
(Figure 18.2b). It is not allowed for q and r to deliver first the view (q, r) and then m
(Figure 18.2c), since then they would deliver a message from a process that they have


===== page 792 =====
774 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.2 View-synchronous group communication
(a) allowed (b) allowed
p crashes p crashes
p p
q q
r r
view (q, r) view (q,r)
view (p, q, r) view (p, q,r)
(c) disallowed (d) disallowed
p crashes p crashes
p p
q q
r r
view (q,r) view (q,r)
view (p,q,r) view (p,q,r)
been informed has failed; nor can the two deliver the message and the new view in
opposite orders (Figure 18.2d).
In a view-synchronous system, the delivery of a new view draws a conceptual line
across the system and every message that is delivered at all is consistently delivered on
one side or the other of that line. This enables the programmer to draw useful
conclusions about the set of messages that other correct processes have delivered when
it delivers a new view, based only on the local ordering of message delivery and view
delivery events.
An illustration of the usefulness of view-synchronous communication is how it
can be used to achieve state transfer – the transfer of the working state from a current
member of a process group to a new member of the group. For example, if the processes
are replica managers that each hold the state of a diary, then a replica manager that joins
the group for that diary needs to acquire the diary’s current state when it joins. But the
diary may be updated concurrently while the state is being captured. It is important that
the replica manager does not miss any update messages that are not reflected in the state
it acquires and that it does not reapply update messages that are already reflected in the
state (unless those updates are idempotent).
To achieve this state transfer, we can use view-synchronous communication in a
simple scheme such as the following. Upon delivery of the first view containing the new
process, some distinct process from amongst the pre-existing members – say, the oldest
– captures its state, sends it one-to-one to the new member and suspends its execution.
All other pre-existing processes suspend their execution. Note that precisely the set of
updates reflected in this state has, by definition, been applied at all other members. Upon


===== page 793 =====
SECTION 18.3 FAULT-TOLERANT SERVICES 775
receipt of the state, the new process integrates it and multicasts a ‘commence!’ message
to the group, at which point all proceed once more.
Discussion • The notion of view-synchronous group communication that we have
presented is a formulation of the ‘virtually synchronous’ communication paradigm
originally developed in the ISIS system [Birman 1993, Birman et al. 1991, Birman and
Joseph 1987b]. Schiper and Sandoz [1993] describe a protocol for achieving view-
synchronous (or as they call it, view-atomic) communication. Note that a group
membership service achieves consensus, but it does so without flouting the impossibility
result of Fischer et al. [1985]. As we discussed in Section 15.5.4, a system can
circumvent that result by using an appropriate failure detector.
Schiper and Sandoz also provide a uniform version of view-synchronous
communication in which the agreement condition covers the case of processes that
crash. This is similar to uniform agreement for multicast communication, which we
described in Section 15.4.2. In the uniform version of view-synchronous
communication, even if a process crashes after it delivers a message, all correct
processes are forced to deliver the message in the same view. This stronger guarantee is
sometimes needed in fault-tolerant applications, since a process that has delivered a
message may have had an effect on the outside world before crashing. For the same
reason, Hadzilacos and Toueg [1994] consider uniform versions of the reliable and
ordered multicast protocols described in Chapter 15.
The V system [Cheriton and Zwaenepoel 1985] was the first system to include
support for process groups. After ISIS, process groups with some type of group
membership service were developed in several other systems, including Horus [van
Renesseet al. 1996], Totem [Moser et al. 1996] and Transis [Dolev and Malki 1996].
Variations on view synchrony have been proposed for partitionable group
membership services, including support for partition-aware applications [Babaoglu et
al. 1998] and extended virtual synchrony [Moser et al. 1994].
Finally, Cristian [1991] discusses a group membership service for synchronous
distributed systems.
18.3 Fault-tolerant services
In this section, we examine how to provide a service that is correct despite up to f process
failures, by replicating data and functionality at replica managers. For the sake of
simplicity, we assume that communication remains reliable and that no partitions occur.
Each replica manager is assumed to behave according to a specification of the
semantics of the objects it manages, when they have not crashed. For example, a
specification of bank accounts would include an assurance that funds transferred
between bank accounts can never disappear, and that only deposits and withdrawals
affect the balance of any particular account.
Intuitively, a service based on replication is correct if it keeps responding despite
failures and if clients cannot tell the difference between the service they obtain from an
implementation with replicated data and one provided by a single correct replica
manager. Care is needed in meeting these criteria. If precautions are not taken, then


===== page 794 =====
776 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
anomalies can arise when there are several replica managers – even bearing in mind that
we are considering the effects of individual operations, not transactions.
Consider a naive replication system, in which a pair of replica managers at
computersA and B each maintain replicas of two bank accounts, x and y. Clients read
and update the accounts at their local replica manager but try another replica manager if
the local one fails. Replica managers propagate updates to one another in the
background after responding to the clients. Both accounts initially have a balance of $0.
Client 1 updates the balance of x at its local replica manager B to be $1 and then
attempts to update y’s balance to be $2, but discovers that B has failed. Client 1 therefore
applies the update at A instead. Now client 2 reads the balances at its local replica
manager A. It finds first that y has $2 and then that x has $0 – the update to bank account
x from B has not arrived, since B failed. The situation is shown below, where the
operations are labelled by the computer at which they first took place and lower
operations happen later:
Client 1: Client 2:
setBalance (cid:11)x(cid:15)1(cid:12)
B
setBalance (cid:11)y(cid:15)2(cid:12)
A
getBalance (cid:11)y(cid:12)(cid:111)2
A
getBalance (cid:11)x(cid:12)(cid:111)0
A
This execution does not match a common-sense specification for the behaviour of bank
accounts: client 2 should have read a balance of $1 for x, given that it read the balance
of $2 for y, since y’s balance was updated after that of x. The anomalous behaviour in
the replicated case could not have occurred if the bank accounts had been implemented
by a single server. We can construct systems that manage replicated objects without the
anomalous behaviour produced by the naive protocol in our example. First, we need to
understand what counts as correct behaviour for a replicated system.
Linearizabilityandsequentialconsistency • There are various correctness criteria for
replicated objects. The most strictly correct systems are linearizable, and this property
is called linearizability. In order to understand linearizability, consider a replicated
service implementation with two clients. Let the sequence of read and update operations
that client i performs in some execution be o (cid:15)o (cid:15)o (cid:15)(cid:125). Each operation o in these
i0 i1 i2 ij
sequences is specified by the operation type and the arguments and return values as they
occurred at runtime. We assume that every operation is synchronous. That is, clients
wait for one operation to complete before requesting the next.
A single server managing a single copy of the objects would serialize the
operations of the clients. In the case of an execution with only client 1 and client 2, this
interleaving of the operations could be o (cid:15)o (cid:15)o (cid:15)o (cid:15)o (cid:15)o (cid:15)(cid:125), say. We define
20 21 10 22 11 12
our correctness criteria for replicated objects by referring to a virtual interleaving of the
clients’ operations, which does not necessarily physically occur at any particular replica
manager but that establishes the correctness of the execution.
A replicated shared object service is said to be linearizable if for any execution
there is some interleaving of the series of operations issued by all the clients that satisfies
the following two criteria:


===== page 795 =====
SECTION 18.3 FAULT-TOLERANT SERVICES 777
(cid:129) The interleaved sequence of operations meets the specification of a (single)
correct copy of the objects.
(cid:129) The order of operations in the interleaving is consistent with the real times at
which the operations occurred in the actual execution.
This definition captures the idea that for any set of client operations there is a virtual
canonical execution – the interleaved operations that the definition refers to – against a
virtual single image of the shared objects. And each client sees a view of the shared
objects that is consistent with that single image: that is, the results of the client’s
operations make sense as they occur within the interleaving.
The service that gave rise to the execution of the bank account clients in the
preceding example is not linearizable. Even ignoring the real time at which the
operations took place, there is no interleaving of the two clients’ operations that would
satisfy any correct bank account specification: for auditing purposes, if one account
update occurred after another, then the first update should be observed if the second has
been observed.
Note that linearizability concerns only the interleaving of individual operations
and is not intended to be transactional. A linearizable execution may break application-
specific notions of consistency if concurrency control is not applied.
The real-time requirement in linearizability is desirable in an ideal world, because
it captures our notion that clients should receive up-to-date information. But, equally,
the presence of real time in the definition raises the issue of linearizability’s practicality,
because we cannot always synchronize clocks to the required degree of accuracy. A
weaker correctness condition is sequential consistency, which captures an essential
requirement concerning the order in which requests are processed without appealing to
real time. The definition keeps the first criterion from the definition for linearizability
but modifies the second.
A replicated shared object service is said to be sequentially consistent if for any
execution there is some interleaving of the series of operations issued by all the clients
that satisfies the following two criteria:
(cid:129) The interleaved sequence of operations meets the specification of a (single)
correct copy of the objects.
(cid:129) The order of operations in the interleaving is consistent with the program order in
which each individual client executed them.
Note that absolute time does not appear in this definition. Nor does any other total order
on all operations. The only notion of ordering that is relevant is the order of events at
each separate client – the program order. The interleaving of operations can shuffle the
sequence of operations from a set of clients in any order, as long as each client’s order
is not violated and the result of each operation is consistent, in terms of the objects’
specification, with the operations that preceded it. This is similar to shuffling together
several packs of cards so that they are intermingled in such a way as to preserve the
original order of each pack.
Every linearizable service is also sequentially consistent, since real-time order
reflects each client’s program order. The converse does not hold. An example execution


===== page 796 =====
778 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
for a service that is sequentially consistent but not linearizable follows:
Client 1: Client 2:
setBalance (cid:11)x(cid:15)1(cid:12)
B
getBalance (cid:11)y(cid:12)(cid:111)0
A
getBalance (cid:11)x(cid:12)(cid:111)0
A
setBalance (cid:11)y(cid:15)2(cid:12)
A
This execution is possible under a naive replication strategy even if neither of the
computersA or B fails but if the update of x that client 1 made at B has not reached A
when client 2 reads it. The real-time criterion for linearizability is not satisfied, since
getBalance (cid:11)x(cid:12)(cid:111)0 occurs later than setBalance (cid:11)x(cid:15)1(cid:12); but the following
A B
interleaving satisfies both criteria for sequential consistency: getBalance (cid:11)y(cid:12)(cid:111)0,
A
getBalance (cid:11)x(cid:12)(cid:111)0, setBalance (cid:11)x(cid:15)1(cid:12), setBalance (cid:11)y(cid:15)2(cid:12).
A B A
Lamport conceived of both sequential consistency [1979] and linearizability
[1986] in relation to shared memory registers (although he used the term ‘atomicity’
instead of ‘linearizability’). Herlihy and Wing [1990] generalized the idea to cover
arbitrary shared objects. Distributed shared memory systems also feature weaker
consistency models, as discussed on the companion website for the book
[www.cdk5.net/dsm].
18.3.1 Passive (primary-backup) replication
In the passive or primary-backup model of replication for fault tolerance (Figure 18.3),
there is at any one time a single primary replica manager and one or more secondary
replica managers – ‘backups’ or ‘slaves’. In the pure form of the model, front ends
communicate only with the primary replica manager to obtain the service. The primary
replica manager executes the operations and sends copies of the updated data to the
backups. If the primary fails, one of the backups is promoted to act as the primary.
The sequence of events when a client requests an operation to be performed is as
follows:
1.Request: The front end issues the request, containing a unique identifier, to the
primary replica manager.
2.Coordination: The primary takes each request atomically, in the order in which it
receivesit. It checks the unique identifier, in case it has already executed the request,
and if so it simply resends the response.
3.Execution: The primary executes the requestand stores the response.
4.Agreement: If the request is an update, then the primary sends the updated state,
the response and the unique identifier to all the backups. The backups send an
acknowledgement.
5.Response: The primary responds to the front end, which hands the response back
to the client.


===== page 797 =====
SECTION 18.3 FAULT-TOLERANT SERVICES 779
Figure 18.3 The passive (primary-backup) model for fault tolerance
Primary
RM
C FE RM
Backup
C FE RM
Backup
This system obviously implements linearizability if the primary is correct, since the
primary sequences all the operations upon the shared objects. If the primary fails, then
the system retains linearizability if a single backup becomes the new primary and if the
new system configuration takes over exactly where the last left off. That is if:
(cid:129) The primary is replaced by a unique backup (if two clients began using two
backups, then the system could perform incorrectly).
(cid:129) The replica managers that survive agree on which operations had been performed
at the point when the replacement primary takes over.
Both of these requirements are met if the replicamanagers (primary and backups) are
organized as a group and if the primary uses view-synchronous group communication
to send the updates to the backups. The first of the above two requirements is then easily
satisfied. When the primary crashes, the communication system eventually delivers a
new view to the surviving backups, one that excludes the old primary. The backup that
replaces the primary can be chosen by any function of that view. For example, the
backups can choose the first member in that view as the replacement. That backup can
register itself as the primary with a name service that the clients consult when they
suspect that the primary has failed (or when they require the service in the first place).
The second requirement is also satisfied, by the ordering property of view-
synchrony and the use of stored identifiers to detect repeated requests. The view-
synchronous semantics guarantee that either all the backups or none of them will deliver
any given update before delivering the new view. Thus the new primary and the
surviving backups all agree on whether any particular client’s update has or has not been
processed.
Consider a front end that has not received a response. The front end retransmits
the request to whichever backup takes over as the primary. The primary may have
crashed at any point during the operation. If it crashed before the agreement stage (4),
then the surviving replica managers cannot have processed the request. If it crashed
during the agreement stage, then they may have processed the request. If it crashed after
that stage, then they have definitely processed it. But the new primary does not have to
know what stage the old primary was in when it crashed. When it receives a request, it
proceeds from stage 2 above. By view-synchrony, no consultation with the backups is
necessary, because they have all processed the same set of messages.


===== page 798 =====
780 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Discussionofpassivereplication • The primary-backup model may be used even where
the primary replica manager behaves in a non-deterministic way, for example due to
multi-threaded operation. Since the primary communicates the updated state from the
operations rather than a specification of the operations themselves, the backups slavishly
record the state determined by the primary’s actions alone.
To survive up to f process crashes, a passive replication system requires f+1
replica managers (such a system cannot tolerate Byzantine failures). The front end
requires little functionality to achieve fault tolerance. It just needs to be able to look up
the new primary when the current primary does not respond.
Passive replication has the disadvantage of providing relatively large overheads.
View-synchronous communication requires several rounds of communication per
multicast, and if the primary fails then yet more latency is incurred while the group
communication system agrees upon and delivers the new view.
In a variation of the model presented here, clients may be able to submit read
requests to the backups, thus offloading work from the primary. The guarantee of
linearizability is thereby lost, but the clients receive a sequentially consistent service.
Passive replication is used in the Harp replicated file system [Liskov et al. 1991].
The Sun Network Information Service (NIS, formerly Yellow Pages) uses passive
replication to achieve high availability and good performance, although with weaker
guarantees than sequential consistency. The weaker consistency guarantees are still
satisfactory for many purposes, such as storing certain types of system administration
records. The replicated data is updated at a master server and propagated from there to
slave servers using one-to-one (rather than group) communication. Clients may
communicate with either a master or a slave server to retrieve information. In NIS,
however, clients may not request updates: updates are made to the master’s files.
18.3.2 Active replication
In the active model of replication for fault tolerance (see Figure 18.4), the replica
managers are state machines that play equivalent roles and are organized as a group.
Front ends multicast their requests to the group of replica managers and all the replica
managers process the request independently but identically and reply. If any replica
manager crashes, this need have no impact upon the performance of the service, since
the remaining replica managers continue to respond in the normal way. We shall see that
active replication can tolerate Byzantine failures, because the front end can collect and
compare the replies it receives.
Under active replication, the sequence of events when a client requests an
operation to be performed is as follows:
1.Request: The front end attaches a unique identifier to the request and multicasts it
to the group of replica managers, using a totally ordered, reliable multicast primitive.
The front end is assumed to fail by crashing at worst. It does not issue the next request
until it has received a response.
2.Coordination: The group communication system delivers the request to every
correct replica manager in the same (total) order.


===== page 799 =====
SECTION 18.3 FAULT-TOLERANT SERVICES 781
Figure 18.4 Active replication
RM
C FE RM FE C
RM
3.Execution: Every replica manager executes the request. Since they are state
machines and since requests are delivered in the same total order, correct replica
managers all process the request identically. The response contains the client’s
unique request identifier.
4.Agreement: No agreement phase is needed, because of the multicast delivery
semantics.
5.Response: Each replica manager sends its response to the front end. The number
of replies that the front end collects depends upon the failure assumptions and the
multicast algorithm. If, for example, the goal is to tolerate only crash failures and the
multicast satisfies uniform agreement and ordering properties, then the front end
passes the first response to arrive back to the client and discards the rest (it can
distinguish these from responses to other requests by examining the identifier in the
response).
This system achieves sequential consistency. All correct replica managers process the
same sequence of requests. The reliability of the multicast ensures that every correct
replica manager processes the same set of requests and the total order ensures that they
process them in the same order. Since they are state machines, they all end up with the
same state as one another after each request. Each front end’s requests are served in
FIFO order (because the front end awaits a response before making the next request),
which is the same as ‘program order’. This ensures sequential consistency.
If clients do not communicate with other clients while waiting for responses to
their requests, then their requests are processed in happened-before order. If clients are
multi-threaded and can communicate with one another while awaiting responses from
the service, then to guarantee request processing in happened-before order we would
have to replace the multicast with one that is both causally and totally ordered.
The active replication system does not achieve linearizability. This is because the
total order in which the replica managers process requests is not necessarily the same as
the real-time order in which the clients made their requests. Schneider [1990] describes
how, in a synchronous system with approximately synchronized clocks, the total order
in which the replica managers process requests can be based on the order of physical


===== page 800 =====
782 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
timestamps that the front ends supply with their requests. This does not guarantee
linearizability, because the timestamps are not perfectly accurate; but it approximates it.
Discussionofactivereplication • We have assumed a solution to totally ordered and
reliable multicast. As Chapter 15 pointed out, solving reliable and totally ordered
multicast is equivalent to solving consensus. Solving consensus in turn requires either
that the system is synchronous or that a technique such as employing failure detectors is
used in an asynchronous system, to work around the impossibility result of Fischer et al.
[1985].
Some solutions to consensus, such as that of Canetti and Rabin [1993], work even
with the assumption of Byzantine failures. Given such a solution, and therefore a
solution to totally ordered and reliable multicast, the active replication system can mask
up to f Byzantine failures, as long as the service incorporates at least 2f+1 replica
managers. Each front end waits until it has collected f+1 identical responses and passes
that response back to the client. It discards other responses to the same request. To be
strictly sure of which response is really associated with which request (given Byzantine
behaviour), we require that the replica managers digitally sign their responses.
It may be possible to relax the system that we have described. First, we have
assumed that all updates to the shared replicated objects must occur in the same order.
However, in practice some operations may commute: that is, the effect of two operations
performed in the order o ;o may be the same as if they were performed in the reverse
1 2
order, o ;o . For example, any two read-only operations (from different clients)
2 1
commute, and any two operations that do not perform reads but update distinct objects
commute. An active replication system may be able to exploit knowledge of
commutativity in order to avoid the expense of ordering all the requests. We pointed out
in Chapter 15 that some have proposed application-specific multicast ordering
semantics [Cheriton and Skeen 1993, Pedone and Schiper 1999].
Finally, front ends may send read-only requests only to individual replica
managers. In doing so, they lose the fault tolerance that comes with multicasting
requests, but the service remains sequentially consistent. Moreover, the front end can
easily mask the failure of a replica manager in this case, simply by submitting the read-
only request to another replica manager.
18.4 Case studies of highly available services: (cid:3)
The gossip architecture, Bayou and Coda
In this section, we consider how to apply replication techniques to make services highly
available. Our emphasis now is on giving clients access to the service – with reasonable
response times – for as much of the time as possible, even if some results do not conform
to sequential consistency. For example, the user on the train described at the beginning
of this chapter may be willing to cope with temporary inconsistencies between copies of
data such as diaries if they can continue to work while disconnected and fix any
problems later.
In Section 18.3, we saw that fault-tolerant systems transmit updates to the replica
managers in an ‘eager’ fashion: all correct replica managers receive the updates as soon
