source: Books - all\DistributedSystems_Concepts&Design_Kindberg.pdf
method: pdf
sha256: 344831445ddb68b16909969a4597cb8100bea220a303757c5ef77e4173545585
pages:  1067
ocr:    2 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    300
----------------------------------------------------------------------
===== page 801 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 783
Figure 18.5 Query and update operations in a gossip service
Service
RM
gossip
RM RM
Query, prev Val, new Update, prev Update id
FE FE
Query Val Update
Clients
as possible and they reach collective agreement before passing control back to the client.
This behaviour is undesirable for highly available operation. Instead, the system should
provide an acceptable level of service using a minimal set of replica managers connected
to the client. And it should minimize how long the client is tied up while replica
managers coordinate their activities. Weaker degrees of consistency generally require
less agreement and so allow shared data to be more available.
We now examine the design of three systems that provide highly available
services: the gossip architecture, Bayou and Coda.
18.4.1 The gossip architecture
Ladinet al. [1992] developed what we call the gossip architecture as a framework for
implementing highly available services by replicating data close to the points where
groups of clients need it. The name reflects the fact that the replica managers exchange
‘gossip’ messages periodically in order to convey the updates they have each received
from clients (see Figure 18.5). The architecture is based upon earlier work on databases
by Fischer and Michael [1982] and Wuu and Bernstein [1984]. It may be used, for
example, to create a highly available electronic bulletin board or diary service.
A gossip service provides two basic types of operation: queries are read-only
operations and updates modify but do not read the state (the latter is a more restricted
definition than the one we have been using). A key feature is that front ends send queries
and updates to any replica manager they choose, provided it is available and can provide
reasonable response times. The system makes two guarantees, even though replica
managers may be temporarily unable to communicate with one another:
Each client obtains a consistent service over time: In answer to a query, replica
managers only ever provide a client with data that reflects at least the updates that the


===== page 802 =====
784 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
client has observed so far. This is even though clients may communicate with
different replica managers at different times, and therefore could in principle
communicate with a replica manager that is ‘less advanced’ than one they used
before.
Relaxed consistency between replicas: All replica managers eventually receive all
updates and they apply updates with ordering guarantees that make the replicas
sufficiently similar to suit the needs of the application. It is important to realize that
while the gossip architecture can be used to achieve sequential consistency, it is
primarily intended to deliver weaker consistency guarantees. Two clients may
observe different replicas even though the replicas include the same set of updates,
and a client may observe stale data.
To support relaxed consistency, the gossip architecture supports causal update ordering,
as we defined it in Section 15.2.1. It also supports stronger ordering guarantees in the
form of forced (total and causal) and immediate ordering. Immediate-ordered updates
are applied in a consistent order relative to any other update at all replica managers,
whether the other update ordering is specified as causal, forced or immediate. Immediate
ordering is provided in addition to forced ordering, because a forced-order update and a
causal-order update that are not related by the happened-before relation may be applied
in different orders at different replica managers.
The choice of which ordering to use is left to the application designer and reflects
a trade-off between consistency and operation costs. Causal updates are considerably
less costly than the others and are expected to be used whenever possible. Note that
queries, which can be satisfied by any single replica manager, are always executed in
causal order with respect to other operations.
Consider an electronic bulletin board application, in which a client program
(which incorporates the front end) executes on the user’s computer and communicates
with a local replica manager. The client sends the user’s postings to the local replica
manager and the replica manager sends new postings in gossip messages to other replica
managers. Readers of bulletin boards experience slightly out-of-date lists of posted
items, but this does not usually matter if the delay is on the order of minutes or hours
rather than days. Causal ordering could be used for posting items. This would mean that
in general postings could appear in different orders at different replica managers but
that, for example, a posting whose subject is ‘Re: oranges’ will always be posted after
the message about ‘oranges’ to which it refers. Forced ordering could be used for adding
a new subscriber to a bulletin board, so that there is an unambiguous record of the order
in which users joined. Immediate ordering could be used for removing a user from a
bulletin board’s subscription list, so that messages could not be retrieved by that user via
some tardy replica manager once the deletion operation had returned.
The front end for a gossip service handles operations that the client makes using
an application-specific API and turns them into gossip operations. In general, client
operations can either read the replicated state, modify it or both. Since in gossip updates
purely modify the state, the front end converts an operation that both reads and modifies
the state into a separate query and update.


===== page 803 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 785
In terms of our basic replication model, an outline of how a gossip service
processes queries and update operations is as follows:
1.Request: The front end normally sends requests to only a single replica manager
at a time. However, a front end will communicate with a different replica manager
when the one it normally uses fails or becomes unreachable, and it may try one or
more others if the normal manager is heavily loaded. Front ends, and thus clients,
may be blocked on query operations. The default arrangement for update operations,
on the other hand, is to return to the client as soon as the operation has been passed
to the front end; the front end then propagates the operation in the background.
Alternatively, for increased reliability, clients may be prevented from continuing
until the update has been delivered to f+1 replica managers, ensuring that it will be
delivered everywhere despite up to f failures.
2.Update response: If the request is an update, then the replica manager replies as
soon as it has received the update.
3.Coordination: The replica manager that receives a request does not process it until
it can apply the request according to the required ordering constraints. This may
involve receiving updates from other replica managers, in gossip messages. No other
coordination between replica managers is involved.
4.Execution: The replica manager executes the request.
5.Query response: If the request is a query, then the replica manager replies at this
point.
6.Agreement: The replica managers update one another by exchanging gossip
messages, which contain the most recent updates they have received. They are said
to update one another in a lazy fashion, in that gossip messages may be exchanged
only occasionally, after several updates have been collected, or when a replica
manager finds out that it is missing an update sent to one of its peers that it needs to
process a request.
We now describe the gossip system in more detail. We begin by considering the
timestamps and data structures that front ends and replica managers maintain in order to
maintain update ordering guarantees. Then, in terms of these, we explain how replica
managers process queries and updates. Much of the processing of vector timestamps
needed to maintain causal updates is similar to the causal multicast algorithm of Section
15.4.3.
Thefrontend’sversiontimestamp • In order to control the ordering of operation
processing, each front end keeps a vector timestamp that reflects the version of the latest
data values accessed by the front end (and therefore accessed by the client). This
timestamp, denoted prev in Figure 18.5, contains an entry for every replica manager.
The front end sends it in every request message to a replica manager, together with a
description of the query or update operation itself. When a replica manager returns a
value as a result of a query operation, it supplies a new vector timestamp (new in Figure
18.5), since the replicas may have been updated since the last operation. Similarly, an
update operation returns a vector timestamp (Update ID in Figure 18.5) that is unique to
the update. Each returned timestamp is merged with the front end’s previous timestamp


===== page 804 =====
786 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.6 Front ends propagate their timestamps whenever clients communicate directly
Service
RM
gossip
RM RM
Vector
FE FE
timestamps
Clients
to record the version of the replicated data that has been observed by the client. (See
Section 14.4 for a definition of vector timestamp merging.)
Clients exchange data by accessing the same gossip service and by
communicating directly with one another. Since client-to-client communication can also
lead to causal relationships between operations applied to the service, it also occurs via
the clients’ front ends. That way, the front ends can piggyback their vector timestamps
on messages to other clients. The recipients merge them with their own timestamps in
order that causal relationships can be inferred correctly. The situation is shown in Figure
18.6.
Replicamanagerstate • Regardless of the application, a replica manager contains the
following main state components (Figure 18.7):
Value: This is the value of the application state as maintained by the replica
manager. Each replica manager is a state machine, which begins with a specified
initial value and is thereafter solely the result of applying update operations to that
state.
Value timestamp: This is the vector timestamp that represents the updates that are
reflected in the value. It contains one entry for every replica manager. It is updated
whenever an update operation is applied to the value.
Update log: All update operations are recorded in this log as soon as they are
received. A replica manager keeps updates in a log for one of two reasons. The first
is that the replica manager cannot yet apply the update because it is not yet stable. A
stable update is one that may be applied consistently with its ordering guarantees
(causal, forced or immediate). An update that is not yet stable must be held back and
not yet processed. The second reason for keeping an update in the log is that, even
though the update has become stable and has been applied to the value, the replica


===== page 805 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 787
Figure 18.7 A gossip replica manager, showing its main state components
Other replica managers
Replica
Replica log
timestamp
Gossip
messages
Replica manager
Timestamp table
Replicatimestamp Valuetimestamp
Stable
Update log Value
updates
Executed operation table
Updates
OperationID Update Prev
FE FE
manager has not received confirmation that this update has been received at all other
replica managers. In the meantime, it propagates the update in gossip messages.
Replica timestamp: This vector timestamp represents those updates that have been
accepted by the replica manager – that is, placed in the manager’s log. It differs from
the value timestamp in general, of course, because not all updates in the log are stable.
Executed operation table: The same update may arrive at a given replica manager
from a front end and in gossip messages from other replica managers. To prevent an
update being applied twice, the ‘executed operation’ table is kept, containing the
unique front-end-supplied identifiers of updates that have been applied to the value.
The replica managers check this table before adding an update to the log.
Timestamp table: This table contains a vector timestamp for each other replica
manager, filled with timestamps that arrive from them in gossip messages. Replica
managers use the table to establish when an update has been applied at all replica
managers.
The replica managers are numbered 0, 1, 2, .., : the ith element of a vector timestamp
held by replica manager i corresponds to the number of updates received from front ends
by i, and the jth component (j (cid:143) i) equals the number of updates received by j and
propagated to i in gossip messages. So, for example, in a three-manager gossip system
a value timestamp of (2,4,5) at manager 0 would represent the fact that the value there
reflects the first two updates accepted from front ends at manager 0, the first four at
manager 1 and the first five at manager 2. The following sections look in more detail at
how the timestamps are used to enforce the ordering.


===== page 806 =====
788 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Queryoperations • The simplest operation to consider is that of a query. Recall that a
query request q contains a description of the operation and a timestamp q.prev sent by
the front end. The latter reflects the latest version of the value that the front end has read
or submitted as an update. Therefore the task of the replica manager is to return a value
that is at least as recent as this. If valueTS is the replica’s value timestamp, then q can be
applied to the replica’s value if:
q.prev(cid:148) valueTS
The replica manager keeps q on a list of pending query operations (that is, a hold-back
queue) until this condition is fulfilled. It can either wait for the missing updates, which
should eventually arrive in gossip messages, or request the updates from the replica
managers concerned. For example, if valueTSis (2,5,5) and q.prev is (2,4,6), it can be
seen that just one update is missing – from replica manager 2. (The front end that
submitted q must have contacted a different replica manager previously for it to have
seen this update, which the replica manager has not seen.)
Once the query can be applied, the replica manager returns valueTS to the front
end as the timestamp new shown in Figure 18.5. The front end then merges this with its
timestamp: frontEndTS := merge(frontEndTS, new). The update at replica manager 1
that the front end has not seen before the query in the example just given (q.prev has 4
where the replica manager has 5) will be reflected in the update to frontEndTS (and
potentially in the value returned, depending on the query).
Processingupdateoperationsincausalorder • A front end submits an update request to
one or more replica managers. Each update request u contains a specification of the
update (its type and parameters) u.op, the front end’s timestamp u.prev, and a unique
identifier that the front end generates, u.id. If the front end sends the same request u to
several replica managers, it uses the same identifier in ueach time – so that it will not
be processed as several different but identical requests.
When replica manager i receives an update request from a front end it checks that
it has not already processed this request by looking up its operation identifier in the
executed operation table and in the records in its log. The replica manager discards the
update if it has already seen it; otherwise, it increments the ith element in its replica
timestamp by one, to keep count of the number of updates it has received directly from
front ends. Then the replica manager assigns to the update request u a unique vector
timestamp whose derivation is given shortly, and a record for the update is placed in the
replica manager’s log. If ts is the unique timestamp that the replica manager assigns to
the update, then the update record is constructed and stored in the log as the following
tuple:
logRecord :=<i,ts, u.op, u.prev, u.id>
Replica manager i derives the timestamp ts from u.prev by replacing u.prev’s ith
element with the ith element of its replica timestamp (which it has just incremented).
This action makes ts unique, thus ensuring that all system components will correctly
record whether or not they have observed the update. The remaining elements in ts are
copied from u.prev, since it is these values sent by the front end that must be used to
determine when the update is stable. The replica manager then immediately passes ts


===== page 807 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 789
back to the front end, which merges it with its existing timestamp. Note that a front end
can submit its update to several replica managers and receive different timestamps in
return, all of which have to be merged into its timestamp.
The stability condition for an update u is similar to that for queries:
u.prev(cid:148) valueTS
This condition states that all the updates on which this update depends – that is, all the
updates that have been observed by the front end that issued the update – have already
been applied to the value. If this condition is not met at the time the update is submitted,
it will be checked again when gossip messages arrive. When the stability condition has
been met for an update record r, the replica manager applies the update to the value and
updates the value timestamp and the executed operation table, executed:
value:= apply(value, r.u.op)(cid:3)
valueTS:= merge(valueTS, r.ts)(cid:3)
executed := executed(cid:137)(cid:94)r.u.id(cid:96)
The first of these three statements represents the application of the update to the value.
In the second statement, the update’s timestamp is merged with that of the value. In the
third, the update’s operation identifier is added to the set of identifiers of operations that
have been executed – which is used to check for repeated operation requests.
Forcedandimmediateupdateoperations • Forced and immediate updates require
special treatment. Recall that forced updates are totally as well as causally ordered. The
basic method for ordering forced updates is for a unique sequence number to be
appended to the timestamps associated with them, and to process them in order of this
sequence number. As Chapter 15 explained, a general method for generating sequence
numbers is to use a single sequencer process. But reliance upon a single process is
inadequate in the context of a highly available service. The solution is to designate a so-
called primary replica manager as the sequencer and to ensure that another replica
manager can be elected to take over consistently as the sequencer should the primary
fail. What is required is for a majority of replica managers (including the primary) to
record which update is next in sequence before the operation can be applied. Then, as
long as a majority of replica managers survive failure, this ordering decision will be
honoured by a new primary elected from among the surviving replica managers.
Immediate updates are ordered with respect to forced updates by using the primary
replica manager to order them in this sequence. The primary also determines which
causal updates are deemed to have preceded an immediate update. It does this by
communicating and synchronizing with the other replica managers in order to reach
agreement. Further details are provided in Ladin et al. [1992].
Gossipmessages • Replica managers send gossip messages containing information
concerning one or more updates so that other replica managers can bring their state up-
to-date. A replica manager uses the entries in its timestamp table to estimate which
updates any other replica manager has not yet received (it is an estimate because that
replica manager may have received more updates by now).


===== page 808 =====
790 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
A gossip message m consists of two items sent by the source replica manager: its
log, m.log, and its replica timestamp, m.ts (see Figure 18.7). The replica manager that
receives a gossip message has three main tasks:
(cid:129) to merge the arriving log with its own (it may contain updates not seen by the
receiver before);
(cid:129) to apply any updates that have become stable and have not been executed before
(stable updates in the arrived log may in turn make pending updates become
stable);
(cid:129) toeliminate records from the log and entries in the executed operation table when
it is known that the updates have been applied everywhere and for which there is
no danger of repeats. Clearing redundant entries from the log and from the
executed operation table is an important task, since they would otherwise grow
without limit.
Merging the log contained in an arrived gossip message with the receiver’s log is
straightforward. Let replicaTS denote the recipient’s replica timestamp. A record r in
m.log is added to the receiver’s log unless r.ts(cid:148)replicaTS – in which case it is already
in the log or it has been applied to the value and then discarded.
The replica manager merges the timestamp of the incoming gossip message with
its own replica timestamp replicaTS, so that it corresponds to the additions to the log:
replicaTS :=merge(replicaTS, m.ts)
When new update records have been merged into the log, the replica manager collects
the set S of any updates in the log that are now stable. These can be applied to the value
but care must be taken over the order in which they are applied so that the happened-
before relation is observed. The replica manager sorts the updates in the set according
to the partial order ‘(cid:148)’ between vector timestamps. It then applies the updates in this
order, smallest first. That is, each r(cid:143)S is applied only when there is no s(cid:143)S such that
s.prev < r.prev.
The replica manager then looks for records in the log that can be discarded. If the
gossip message was sent by replica manager j and if tableTS is the table of replica
timestamps of the replica managers, then the replica manager sets
tableTS[j] := m.ts
The replica manager can now discard any record r in the log for an update that has been
received everywhere. That is, if c is the replica manager that created the record, then we
require for all replica managers i:
tableTS(cid:62)i(cid:64)(cid:62)c(cid:64)(cid:116)r.ts(cid:62)c(cid:64)
The gossip architecture also defines how replica managers can discard entries in the
executed operation table. It is important not to discard these entries too early; otherwise,
a much-delayed operation could mistakenly be applied twice. Ladin et al. [1992]
provide details of the scheme. In essence, front ends issue acknowledgements to the


===== page 809 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 791
replies to their updates, so replica managers know when a front end will stop sending the
update. They assume a maximum update propagation delay from that point.
Updatepropagation • The gossip architecture does not specify when replica managers
exchange gossip messages, or how a replica manager decides where to send its gossip
messages. A robust update-propagation strategy is needed if all replica managers are to
receive all updates in an acceptable time.
The time it takes for all replica managers to receive a given update depends upon
three factors:
(cid:129) the frequency and duration of network partitions;
(cid:129) the frequency with which replica managers send gossip messages;
(cid:129) the policy for choosing a partner with which to exchange gossip.
The first factor is beyond the system’s control, although users can to some extent
determine how often they work disconnectedly.
The desired gossip-exchange frequency may be tuned to the application. Consider
a bulletin board system shared between several sites. It seems unnecessary for every
item to be dispatched immediately to all sites. But what if gossip is only exchanged after
long periods, say once a day? If only causal updates are used, then it is quite possible for
clients at each site to have their own consistent debates over the same bulletin board,
oblivious to the discussions at the other sites. Then at, say, midnight, all the debates will
be merged; but debates on the same topic are likely to be incongruous, when it would
have been preferable for them to take account of one another. A gossip-exchange period
of minutes or hours seems more appropriate in this case.
There are several types of partner-selection policy. Golding and Long [1993]
consider random, deterministic and topological policies for their ‘timestamped anti-
entropy protocol’, which uses a gossip-style update propagation scheme.
Random policies choose a partner randomly but with weighted probabilities so as
to favour some partners over others – for example, near partners over far partners.
Golding and Long found that such a policy works surprisingly well under simulations.
Deterministic policies utilize a simple function of the replica manager’s state to make
the choice of partner. For example, a replica manager could examine its timestamp table
and choose the replica manager that appears to be the furthest behind in the updates it
has received.
Topological policies arrange the replica managers into a fixed graph. One
possibility is a mesh: replica managers send gossip messages to the four replica
managers to which it is connected. Another is to arrange the replica managers in a circle,
with each passing on gossip only to its neighbour (in the clockwise direction, say), so
that updates from any replica manager eventually traverse the circle. There are many
other possible topologies, including trees.
Different partner-seclection policies such as these trade off the amount of
communication against higher transmission latencies and the possibility that a single
failure will affect other replica managers. The choice depends in practice on the relative
importance of these factors. For example, the circle topology produces relatively little
communication but is subject to high transmission latencies since gossip generally has
to traverse several replica managers. Moreover, if one replica manager fails then the
circle cannot function and needs to be reconfigured. By contrast, the random selection


===== page 810 =====
792 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
policy is not susceptible to failures but may produce more variable update propagation
times.
Discussionofthegossiparchitecture • The gossip architecture is aimed at achieving
high availability for services. In its favour, this architecture ensures that clients can
continue to obtain a service even when they are partitioned from the rest of the network,
as long as at least one replica manager continues to function in their partition. But this
type of availability is achieved at the expense of enforcing only relaxed consistency
guarantees. For objects such as bank accounts, where sequential consistency is required,
a gossip architecture can do no better than the fault-tolerant systems studied in Section
18.3 and supply the service only in a majority partition.
Its lazy approach to update propagation makes a gossip-based system
inappropriate for updating replicas in near-real time, such as when users take part in a
‘real-time’ conference and update a shared document. A multicast-based system would
be more appropriate for that case.
The scalability of a gossip system is another issue. As the number of replica
managers grows, so does the number of gossip messages that have to be transmitted and
the size of the timestamps used. If a client makes a query, then this normally takes two
messages (between front end and replica manager). If a client makes a causal update
operation and if each of the R replica managers normally collects G updates into a gossip
message, then the number of messages exchanged is 2+(cid:11)R–1(cid:12)(cid:101)G. The first term
represents communication between the front end and replica manager and the second is
the update’s share of a gossip message sent to the other replica managers. Increasing G
improves the number of messages but worsens the delivery latencies, because the replica
manager waits for more updates to arrive before propagating them.
One approach to making gossip-based services scalable is to make most of the
replicas read-only. In other words, these replicas are updated by gossip messages but do
not receive updates directly from front ends. This arrangement is potentially useful
where the update/query ratio is small. Read-only replicas can be situated close to client
groups and updates can be serviced by relatively few central replica managers. Gossip
traffic is reduced since read-only replicas have no gossip to propagate, and vector
timestamps need only contain entries for the updateable replicas.
18.4.2 Bayou and the operational transformation approach
The Bayou system [Terry et al. 1995, Petersen et al. 1997] provides data replication for
high availability with weaker guarantees than sequential consistency, like the gossip
architecture and the timestamped anti-entropy protocol. As in those systems, Bayou
replica managers cope with variable connectivity by exchanging updates in pairs, in
what the designers also call an anti-entropy protocol. But Bayou adopts a markedly
different approach in that it enables domain-specific conflict detection and conflict
resolution to take place.
Consider the user who needs to update a diary while working disconnectedly. If
strict consistency is required, in the gossip architecture updates would have to be
performed using a forced (totally ordered) operation. But then only users in a majority
partition could update the diary. The users’ access to the diary might thus be limited,
regardless of whether they in fact are making updates that would break the diary’s


===== page 811 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 793
integrity. Users who want to fill in a non-conflicting appointment are treated the same
as users who might have unwittingly double-booked a time slot.
In Bayou, by contrast, the users on the train and at work may make any updates
they like. All the updates are applied and recorded at whatever replica manager they
reach. When updates received at any two replica managers are merged during an anti-
entropy exchange, however, the replica managers detect and resolve conflicts. Any
domain-specific criterion for resolving conflicts between operations may be applied. For
example, if an executive working offsite, and her secretary have added appointments in
the same time slot, then a Bayou system detects this after the executive has reconnected
their laptop. Moreover, it resolves the conflict according to a domain-specific policy. In
this case, it could, for example, confirm the executive’s appointment and remove the
secretary’s booking in the slot. Such an effect, in which one or more of a set of
conflicting operations are undone or altered in order to resolve them, is called an
operational transformation.
The state that Bayou replicates is held in the form of a database, supporting
queries and updates (that may insert, modify or delete items in the database). Although
we shall not concentrate on this aspect here, a Bayou update is a special case of a
transaction. It consists of a single operation, an invocation of a ‘stored procedure’, that
affects several objects within each replica manager but is carried out with the ACID
guarantees. Bayou may undo and redo updates to the database as execution proceeds.
The Bayou guarantee is that, eventually, every replica manager receives the same
set of updates and it eventually applies those updates in such a way that the replica
managers’ databases are identical. In practice, there may be a continuous stream of
updates and the databases may never become identical; but they would become identical
if the updates ceased.
Committedandtentativeupdates • Updates are marked as tentative when they are first
applied to a database. Bayou arranges that tentative updates are eventually placed in a
canonical order and marked as committed. While updates are tentative, the system may
undo and reapply them as necessary to produce a consistent state. Once committed, they
remain applied in their allotted order. In practice, the committed order can be achieved
by designating some replica manager as the primary replica manager. In the usual way,
this decides the committed order as that in which it receives the tentative updates and it
propagates that ordering information to other replica managers. For the primary, users
can choose, for example, a fast machine that is usually available, or the replica manager
on an executive’s laptop, if that user’s updates take priority.
At any one time, the state of a database replica derives from a (possibly empty)
sequence of committed updates followed by a (possibly empty) sequence of tentative
updates. If the next committed update arrives, or if one of the tentative updates that has
been applied becomes the next committed update, then a reordering of the updates must
take place. In Figure 18.8,t has become committed. All tentative updates after c need
i N
to be undone; t is then applied after c and t to t and t etc. reapplied after t .
i N 0 i–1 i+1 i
Dependencychecksandmergeprocedures • An update may conflict with some other
operation that has already been applied. Because of this possibility, every Bayou update
contains a dependency check and a merge procedure in addition to the operation’s
specification (the operation type and parameters). All these components of an update are
domain-specific.


===== page 812 =====
794 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.8 Committed and tentative updates in Bayou
Committed Tentative
c c c c t t t t t
0 1 2 N 0 1 2 i i+1
Tentative update t becomes the next committed update
i
and is inserted after the last committed update c.
N
A replica manager calls the dependency check procedure before applying the
operation. It checks whether a conflict would occur if the update was applied and it may
examine any part of the database to do that. For example, consider the case of booking
an appointment in a diary. The dependency check could, most simply, test for a write-
write conflict: that is, whether another client has filled the required slot. But the
dependency check could also test for a read-write conflict. For example, it could test that
the desired slot is empty and that the number of appointments on that day is fewer than
six.
If the dependency check indicates a conflict, then Bayou invokes the operation’s
merge procedure. That procedure alters the operation that will be applied so that it
achieves something similar to the intended effect but avoids a conflict. For example, in
the case of the diary the merge procedure could choose another slot at a nearby time
instead or, as we mentioned above, it could use a simple priority scheme to decide which
appointment is more important and impose that one. The merge procedure may fail to
find a suitable alteration of the operation, in which case the system indicates an error.
The effect of a merge procedure is deterministic, however – Bayou replica managers are
state machines.
Discussion • Bayou differs from the other replication schemes that we have considered
in that it makes replication non-transparent to the application. It exploits knowledge of
the application’s semantics in order to increase the availability of data while maintaining
a replicated state that is what we might call eventually sequentially consistent.
This approach has a few disadvantages. The first is the increased complexity for
the application programmer, who must supply dependency checks and merge
procedures. Both may be complex to produce, given the potentially large number of
possible conflicts that need to be detected and resolved. The second disadvantage is the
increased complexity for the user. Users are expected to deal not only with data that are
read while they are still tentative but also with the fact that the operations they specify
may turn out to have been altered later. For example, the user may book a slot in a diary,
only to find later that the booking has ‘jumped’ to a nearby slot. It is very important that
the user be given a clear indication of which data are tentative and which are committed.
The operational transformation approach used by Bayou appears particularly in
systems to support computer-supported cooperative working (CSCW), where
conflicting updates between geographically separated users may occur [Kindberg et al.
1996, Sun and Ellis 1998]. The approach is limited, in practice, to applications where
conflicts are relatively rare, where the underlying data semantics are relatively simple;
and where users can cope with tentative information.


===== page 813 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 795
18.4.3 The Coda file system
The Coda file system is a descendent of AFS (see Section 12.4) that aims to address
several requirements that AFS does not meet – particularly the requirement to provide
high availability despite disconnected operation. It was developed in a research project
undertaken by Satyanarayanan and his coworkers at Carnegie-Mellon University
[Satyanarayanan et al. 1990, Kistler and Satyanarayanan 1992]. The design
requirements for Coda were derived from experience with AFS at CMU and elsewhere
involving its use in large-scale distributed systems on both local and wide area
communication networks.
While the performance and ease of administration of AFS were found to be
satisfactory under the conditions of use at CMU, it was felt that the limited form of
replication (restricted to read-only volumes) offered by AFS was bound to become a
limiting factor at some scale, especially for accessing widely shared files such as
electronic bulletin boards and other system-wide databases.
In addition, there was room for improvement in the availability of the service
offered by AFS. The most common difficulties experienced by users of AFS arose from
the failure (or scheduled interruption) of servers and network components. The scale of
the system at CMU was such that a few service failures occurred every day and they
could seriously inconvenience many users for periods ranging from a few minutes to
many hours.
Finally, a mode of computer use was emerging that AFS did not cater for – the
mobile use of portable computers. This led to a requirement to make all of the files
needed for a user to continue their work available while disconnected from the network
without resorting to manual methods for managing the locations of files.
Coda aims to meet all three of these requirements under the general heading of
constant data availability. The aim was to provide users with the benefits of a shared file
repository but to allow them to rely entirely on local resources when the repository is
partially or totally inaccessible. In addition to these aims, Coda retains the original goals
of AFS with regard to scalability and the emulation of UNIX file semantics.
In contrast to AFS, where read-write volumes are stored on just one server, the
design of Coda relies on the replication of file volumes to achieve a higher throughput
of file access operations and a greater degree of fault tolerance. In addition, Coda relies
on an extension of the mechanism used in AFS for caching copies of files at client
computers to enable those computers to operate when they are not connected to the
network.
Coda is like Bayou in so far as it follows an optimistic strategy. That is, it allows
clients to update data while the system is partitioned, on the basis that conflicts are
relatively unlikely and that they can be fixed if they do occur. Like Bayou, it detects
conflicts, but unlike Bayou it performs these checks without regard to the semantics of
the data stored in files. Also unlike Bayou, it provides only limited system support for
resolving conflicting replicas.
TheCodaarchitecture • Coda runs what it calls ‘Venus’ processes at the client
computers and ‘Vice’ processes at file server computers, adopting the AFS terminology.
The Vice processes are what we have called replica managers. The Venus processes are
a hybrid of front ends and replica managers. They play the front end’s role of hiding the
service implementation from local client processes, but since they manage a local cache


===== page 814 =====
796 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
of files they are also replica managers (although of a different type to the Vice
processes).
The set of servers holding replicas of a file volume is known as the volume storage
group (VSG). At any instant, a client wishing to open a file in such a volume can access
some subset of the VSG, known as the available volume storage group (AVSG). The
membership of the AVSG varies as servers become accessible or are made inaccessible
by network or server failures.
Normally, Coda file access proceeds in a similar manner to AFS, with cached
copies of files being supplied to the client computers by any one of the servers in the
current AVSG. As in AFS, clients are notified of changes via a callback promise
mechanism, but this now depends on an additional mechanism for the distribution of
updates to each replica. On close, copies of modified files are broadcast in parallel to all
of the servers in the AVSG.
In Coda, disconnected operation is said to occur when the AVSG is empty. This
may be due to network or server failures, or it may be a consequence of the deliberate
disconnection of the client computer, as in the case of a laptop. Effective disconnected
operation relies on the presence in the client computer’s cache of all of the files that are
required for the user’s work to proceed. To achieve this, the user must cooperate with
Coda to generate a list of files that should be cached. A tool is provided that records a
historical list of file usage while connected, and this serves as a basis for predicting
usage while disconnected.
It is a principle of the design of Coda that the copies of files residing on servers
are more reliable than those residing in the caches of client computers. Although it might
be possible logically to construct a file system that relies entirely on cached copies of
files in client computers, it is unlikely that a satisfactory quality of service would be
achieved. The Coda servers exist to provide the necessary quality of service. The copies
of files residing in client computer caches are regarded as useful only as long as their
currency can be periodically revalidated against the copies residing in servers. In the
case of disconnected operation, revalidation occurs when disconnected operation ceases
and the cached files are reintegrated with those in the servers. In the worst case, this may
require some manual intervention to resolve inconsistencies or conflicts.
Thereplicationstrategy • Coda’s replication strategy is optimistic – it allows
modification of files to proceed when the network is partitioned or during disconnected
operation. It relies on the attachment to each version of a file of a Coda version vector
(CVV). A CVV is a vector timestamp with one element for each server in the relevant
VSG. Each element of the CVV is an estimate of the number of modifications performed
on the version of the file that is held at the corresponding server. The purpose of the
CVVs is to provide sufficient information about the update history of each file replica
to enable potential conflicts to be detected and submitted for manual intervention and
for stale replicas to be updated automatically.
If the CVV at one of the sites is greater than or equal to all the corresponding
CVVs at the other sites (Section 14.4 defines the meaning of v (cid:116)v for vector
1 2
timestamps v and v ), then there is no conflict. Older replicas (with strictly smaller
1 2
timestamps) include all the updates in a newer replica and they can automatically be
brought up-to-date with it.


===== page 815 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 797
When this is not the case – that is, when neither v (cid:116)v nor v (cid:116)v holds for two
1 2 2 1
CVVs – then there is a conflict: each replica reflects at least one update that the other
does not reflect. Coda does not, in general, resolve conflicts automatically. The file is
marked as ‘inoperable’ and the owner of the file is informed of the conflict.
When a modified file is closed, each site in the current AVSG is sent an update
message by the Venus process at the client, containing the current CVV and the new
contents for the file. The Vice process at each site checks the CVV and, if it is greater
than the one currently held, stores the new contents for the file and returns a positive
acknowledgement. The Venus process then computes a new CVV with modification
counts increased for the servers that responded positively to the update message and
distributes the new CVV to the members of the AVSG.
Since the message is sent only to the members of the AVSG and not the VSG,
servers that are not in the current AVSG do not receive the new CVV. Any CVV will
therefore always contain an accurate modification count for the local server, but the
counts for non-local servers will in general be lower bounds, since they will be updated
only when the server receives an update message.
The box below contains an example illustrating the use of CVVs to manage the
updating of a file replicated at three sites. Further details on the use of CVVs for the
Example:Consider a sequence of modifications to a file F in a volume that is
replicated at three servers, S , S and S . The VSG for F is {S , S , S }.F is modified
1 2 3 1 2 3
at about the same time by two clients, C and C . Because of a network fault, C can
1 2 1
access only S and S (C ’s AVSG is {S , S }) and C can access only S (C ’s
1 2 1 1 2 2 3 2
AVSG is {S }).
3
1. Initially, the CVVs for F at all three servers are the same – say, [1,1,1].
2. C runs a process that opens F, modifies it and then closes it. The Venus process
1
at C broadcasts an update message to its AVSG, {S , S }, finally resulting in
2 1 2
new versions of F and a CVV [2,2,1] at S and S but no change at S .
1 2 3
3. Meanwhile, C runs two processes, each of which opens F, modifies it and then
2
closes it. The Venus process at C broadcasts an update message to its AVSG,
2
{S }, after each modification, finally resulting in a new version of F and a CVV
3
[1,1,3]atS .
3
4. At some later time, the network fault is repaired, and C makes a routine check
2
to see whether the inaccessible members of the VSG have become accessible
(the process by which such checks are made is described later) and discovers that
S and S are now accessible. It modifies its AVSG to {S , S , S } for the volume
1 2 1 2 3
containing F and requests the CVVs for F from all members of the new AVSG.
When they arrive, C discovers that S and S each have CVVs [2,2,1] whereas
2 1 2
S has [1,1,3]. This represents a conflict requiring manual intervention to bring
3
F up-to-date in a manner that minimizes the loss of update information.
On the other hand, consider a similar but simpler scenario that follows the same
sequence of events as the one above, but omitting item (3), so that F is not modified
by C . The CVV at S therefore remains unchanged as [1,1,1], and when the network
2 3
fault is repaired, C discovers that the CVVs at S and S ([2,2,1]) dominate that at
2 1 2
S . The version of the file at S or S should replace that at S .
3 1 2 3


===== page 816 =====
798 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
management of updates can be found in Satyanarayanan et al. [1990]. CVVs are based
on the replication techniques used in the Locus system [Popek and Walker 1985].
In normal operation, the behaviour of Coda appears similar to that of AFS. A
cache miss is transparent to users and only imposes a performance penalty. The
advantages deriving from the replication of some or all file volumes on multiple servers
are:
(cid:129) The files in a replicated volume remain accessible to any client that can access
at least one of the replicas.
(cid:129) The performance of the system can be improved by sharing some of the load
of servicing client requests on a replicated volume between all of the servers
that hold replicas.
In disconnected operation (when none of the servers for a volume can be accessed by
the client) a cache miss prevents further progress and the computation is suspended until
the connection is resumed or the user aborts the process. It is therefore important to load
the cache before disconnected operation commences so that cache misses can be
avoided.
In summary, compared with AFS, Coda enhances availability both by the
replication of files across servers and by the ability of clients to operate entirely out of
their caches. Both methods depend upon the use of an optimistic strategy for the
detection of update conflicts in the presence of network partitions. The mechanisms are
complementary and independent of each other. For example, a user can exploit the
benefits of disconnected operation even though the required file volumes are stored on
a single server.
Updatesemantics • The currency guarantees offered by Coda when a client opens a file
are weaker than for AFS, reflecting the optimistic update strategy. The single server S
referred to in the currency guarantees for AFS is replaced by a set of servers S (the file’s
VSG) and the client C can access a subset of servers s (the AVSG for the file seen by C).
Informally, the guarantee offered by a successfulopen in Coda is that it provides
the most recent copy of F from the current AVSG, and if no server is accessible, a locally
cached copy of F is used if one is available. A successful close guarantees that the file
has been propagated to the currently accessible set of servers, or, if no server is
available, that the file has been marked for propagation at the earliest opportunity.
A more precise definition of these guarantees, taking into account the effect of lost
callbacks, can be made using an extension of the notation used for AFS. In each
definition except the last there are two cases: the first, beginning s (cid:143) Ø, refers to all
situations in which the AVSG is not empty, and the second deals with disconnected
operation:
after a successful open: (s (cid:143) Ø and (latest(F, s,0)(cid:3)
or (latest(F, s,T) and lostCallback(s,T) and(cid:3)
inCache(F))))(cid:3)
or(s = Ø and inCache(F))
after a failed open: (s (cid:143) Ø and conflict(F, s))(cid:3)
or(s = Ø and ¬inCache(F))


===== page 817 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES 799
after a successful close: (s (cid:143) Ø and updated(F, s))(cid:3)
or(s = Ø)
after a failed close: s (cid:143) Ø and conflict(F, s)
This model assumes a synchronous system: T is the longest time for which a client can
remain unaware of an update elsewhere to a file that is in its cache; latest(F, s,T)
denotes the fact that the current value of F at C was the latest across all the servers in s
at some instant in the last T seconds and that there were no conflicts among the copies
of F at that instant; lostCallback(s,T) means that a callback was sent by some member
of s in the last T seconds and was not received at C; and conflict(F, s) means that the
values of F at some servers in s are currently in conflict.
Accessingreplicas • The strategy used on open and close to access the replicas of a file
is a variant of the read-one/write-all approach described in Section 18.5. On open, if a
copy of the file is not present in the local cache the client identifies a preferred server
from the AVSG for the file. The preferred server may be chosen at random, or on the
basis of performance criteria such as physical proximity or server load. The client
requests a copy of the file attributes and contents from the preferred server, and on
receiving it, it checks with all the other members of the AVSG to verify that the copy is
the latest available version. If not, a member of the AVSG with the latest version is made
the preferred site, the file contents are refetched and the members of the AVSG are
notified that some members have stale replicas. When the fetch has been completed, a
callback promise is established at the preferred server.
When a file is closed at a client after modification, its contents and attributes are
transmitted in parallel to all the members of the AVSG using a multicast remote
procedure calling protocol. This maximizes the probability that every replication site for
a file has the current version at all times. It doesn’t guarantee it, because the AVSG does
not necessarily include all the members of the VSG. It minimizes the server load by
giving clients the responsibility for propagating changes to the replication sites in the
normal case (servers are involved only when a stale replica is discovered on open).
Since maintaining callback state in all the members of an AVSG would be
expensive, the callback promise is maintained only at the preferred server. But this
introduces a new problem: the preferred server for one client need not be in the AVSG
of another client. If this is the case, an update by the second client will not cause a
callback to the first client. The solution adopted to this problem is discussed in the next
subsection.
Cachecoherence • The Coda currency guarantees stated above mean that the Venus
process at each client must detect the following events within T seconds of their
occurrence:
(cid:129) enlargement of an AVSG (due to the accessibility of a previously inaccessible
server);
(cid:129) shrinking of an AVSG (due to a server becoming inaccessible);
(cid:129) a lost callback event.
To achieve this, Venus sends a probe message to all the servers in VSGs of the files that
it has in its cache every T seconds. Responses will be received only from accessible


===== page 818 =====
800 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
servers. If Venus receives a response from a previously inaccessible server it enlarges
the corresponding AVSG and drops the callback promises on any files that it holds from
the relevant volume. This is done because the cached copy may no longer be the latest
version available in the new AVSG.
If it fails to receive a response from a previously accessible server Venus shrinks
the corresponding AVSG. No callback changes are required unless the shrinkage is
caused by the loss of a preferred server, in which case all callback promises from that
server must be dropped. If a response indicates that a callback message was sent but not
received, the callback promise on the corresponding file is dropped.
We are now left with the problem, mentioned above, of updates that are missed by
a server because it is not in the AVSG of a different client that performs an update. To
deal with this case, Venus is sent a volume version vector (volume CVV) in response to
each probe message. The volume CVV contains a summary of the CVVs for all of the
files in the volume. If Venus detects any mismatch between the volume CVVs then some
members of the AVSG must have some file versions that are not up-to-date. Although
the outdated files may not be the ones that are in its local cache, Venus makes a
pessimistic assumption and drops the callback promises on all of the files that it holds
from the relevant volume.
Note that Venus only probes servers in the VSGs of files for which it holds cached
copies and that a single probe message serves to update the AVSGs and check the
callbacks for all of the files in a volume. This, combined with a relatively large value for
T (on the order of 10 minutes in the experimental implementation), means that the
probes are not an obstacle to the scalability of Coda to large numbers of servers and wide
area networks.
Disconnectedoperation • During brief disconnections, such as those that may occur
because of unexpected service interruptions, the least recently used cache replacement
policy normally adopted by Venus may be sufficient to avoid cache misses on the
disconnected volumes. But it is unlikely that a client could operate in disconnected mode
for extended periods without generating references to files or directories that are not in
the cache unless a different policy is adopted.
Coda therefore allows users to specify a prioritized list of files and directories that
Venus should strive to retain in the cache. Objects at the highest level are identified as
sticky and these must be retained in the cache at all times. If the local disk is large enough
to accommodate all of them, the user is assured that they will remain accessible. Since
it is often difficult to know exactly what file accesses are generated by any sequence of
user actions, a tool is provided that enables the user to bracket a sequence of actions;
Venus notes the file references generated by the sequence and flags them with a given
priority.
When disconnected operation ends, a process of reintegration begins. For each
cached file or directory that has been modified, created or deleted during disconnected
operation, Venus executes a sequence of update operations to make the AVSG replicas
identical to the cached copy. Reintegration proceeds top-down from the root of each
cached volume.
Conflicts may be detected during reintegration due to updates to AVSG replicas
by other clients. When this occurs, the cached copy is stored in a temporary location on
the server, and the user that initiated the reintegration is informed. This approach is


===== page 819 =====
SECTION 18.4 CASE STUDIES OF HIGHLY AVAILABLE SERVICES: THE GOSSIP ARCHITECTURE, BAYOU AND
based on the design philosophy adopted in Coda, which assigns priority to server-based
replicas over cached copies. The temporary copies are stored in a covolume, which is
associated with each volume on a server. Covolumes resemble the lost+found
directories found in conventional UNIX systems. They mirror just those parts of the file
directory structure needed to hold the temporary data. Little additional storage is
required, because the covolumes are almost empty.
Performance • Satyanarayanan et al. [1990] compared the performance of Coda with
AFS under benchmark loads designed to simulate user populations ranging from 5 to 50
typical AFS users.
With no replication, there is no significant difference between the performance of
AFS and that of Coda. With threefold replication, the time taken for Coda to perform a
benchmark load equivalent to 5 typical users exceeds that of AFS without replication by
only 5%. However, with threefold replication and a load equivalent to 50 users, the time
required to complete the benchmark is increased by 70%, whereas that for AFS without
replication is increased by only 16%. This difference is attributed only in part to the
overheads associated with replication – differences in the tuning of the implementation
are said to account for part of the difference in performance.
Discussion • We pointed out above that Coda is similar to Bayou in that it also employs
an optimistic approach to achieving high availability (although they differ in several
other ways, not least because one manages files and the other databases). We also
described how Coda uses CVVs to check for conflicts, without regard to the semantics
of the data stored in files. The approach can detect potential write-write conflicts but not
read-write conflicts. These are ‘potential’ write-write conflicts because at the level of
the application semantics there may be no actual conflict: clients may have updated
different objects in the file compatibly such that a simple automatic merge would be
possible.
Coda’s overall approach of semantics-free conflict detection and manual
resolution is sensible in many cases, especially in applications that require human
judgement or in systems with no knowledge of the data’s semantics.
Directories are a special case in Coda. Automatically maintaining the integrity of
these key objects through conflict resolution is sometimes possible, since their
semantics are relatively simple: the only changes that can be made to directories are the
insertion or deletion of directory entries. Coda incorporates its own method for resolving
directories. It has the same effect as Bayou’s approach of operational transformation, but
Coda merges the state of conflicting directories directly, since it has no record of the
operations that clients performed.
Replication in Dynamo • Section 16.7 introduced Dynamo, the storage service that
Amazon uses for applications such as shopping carts that require only key/value access.
In Dynamo [DeCandia et al. 2007], data is partitioned and replicated; all updates reach
all replicas eventually.
Like Bayou and Coda, Dynamo uses optimistic replication techniques; changes
are allowed to propagate to replicas in the background and concurrent, disconnected
work is tolerated. This approach can lead to conflicting changes that must be detected
and resolved.
In Dynamo, writes are always accepted and written as immutable versions, so that
customers can always add and remove items to and from their shopping carts.


===== page 820 =====
802 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Vector timestamps are used to determine causal ordering between different
versions of the same object. The timestamps are compared as described in Section 14.4.
When the vector timestamp of one version is less than that of another, the earlier version
is discarded. Otherwise, the two versions conflict and must be resolved. Both versions
of the data are stored and then given to a client as the results of a read operation.
This client is responsible for resolving the conflict. Dynamo provides both the
application-level approach of Bayou and the system-level approach of Coda. The former
approach is used for shopping carts, where all the add item operations in conflicting
versions are merged and sometimes a deleted item can reappear. When application
semantics cannot be used, Dynamo uses simple timestamp-based resolution – the object
with the largest physical timestamp value is chosen as the correct version.
18.5 Transactions with replicated data
So far in this chapter we have considered systems in which clients request single
operations at a time on replicated sets of objects. Chapters 16 and 17 explained that
transactions are sequences of one or more operations, applied in such a way as to enforce
the ACID properties. As with the systems in Section 18.4, objects in transactional
systems may be replicated to increase both availability and performance.
From a client’s viewpoint, a transaction on replicated objects should appear the
same as one with non-replicated objects. In a non-replicated system, transactions appear
to be performed one at a time in some order. This is achieved by ensuring a serially
equivalent interleaving of clients’ transactions. The effect of transactions performed by
clients on replicated objects should be the same as if they had been performed one at a
time on a single set of objects. This property is called one-copy serializability. It is
similar to, but not to be confused with, sequential consistency. Sequential consistency
considers valid executions without any notion of aggregating the client operations into
transactions.
Each replica manager provides concurrency control and recovery of its own
objects. In this section, we assume that two-phase locking is used for concurrency
control.
Recovery is complicated by the fact that a failed replica manager is a member of
a collection and that the other members continue to provide a service during the time that
it is unavailable. When a replica manager recovers from a failure, it uses information
obtained from the other replica mangers to restore its objects to their current values,
taking into account all the changes that have occurred during the time it was unavailable.
This section first introduces the architecture for transactions with replicated data.
Architectural questions are whether a client request can be addressed to any of the
replica managers; how many replica managers are required for the successful
completion of an operation; whether the replica manager contacted by a client can defer
the forwarding of requests until a transaction is committed; and how to carry out a two-
phase commit protocol.
The implementation of one-copy serializability is illustrated by read-one/write-all
– a simple replication scheme in which read operations are performed by a single replica
manager and write operations are performed by all of them.


===== page 821 =====
SECTION 18.5 TRANSACTIONS WITH REPLICATED DATA 803
The section then discusses the problems of implementing replication schemes in
the presence of server crashes and recovery. It introduces available copies replication,
a variant of the read-one/write-all replication scheme in which read operations are
performed by any single replica manager and write operations are performed by all of
those that are available.
Finally, the section presents three replication schemes that work correctly when
the collection of replica managers is divided into subgroups by a network partition:
(cid:129) Available copies with validation: Available copies replication is applied in each
partition. When a partition is repaired, a validation procedure is applied and any
inconsistencies are dealt with.
(cid:129) Quorum consensus: A subgroup must have a quorum (meaning that it has
sufficient members) in order to be allowed to continue providing a service in the
presence of a partition. When a partition is repaired (and when a replica manager
restarts after a failure), replica managers get their objects up-to-date by means of
recovery procedures.
(cid:129) Virtual partition: A combination of quorum consensus and available copies. If a
virtual partition has a quorum, it can use available copies replication.
18.5.1 Architectures for replicated transactions
As with the range of systems we have already considered in previous sections, a front
end may either multicast client requests to groups of replica managers or send each
request to a single replica manager, which is then responsible for processing the request
and responding to the client. Wiesmann et al. [2000] and Schiper and Raynal [1996]
consider the case of multicast requests, and we shall not deal with it here. Henceforth,
we assume that a front end sends client requests to one of the group of replica managers
of a logical object. In the primary copy approach, all front ends communicate with a
distinguished ‘primary’ replica manager to perform an operation, and that replica
manager keeps the backups up-to-date. Alternatively, front ends may communicate with
any replica manager to perform an operation – but coordination between the replica
managers is consequently more complex.
The replica manager that receives a request to perform an operation on a particular
object is responsible for getting the cooperation of the other replica managers in the
group that have copies of that object. Different replication schemes have different rules
as to how many of the replica managers in a group are required for the successful
completion of an operation. For example, in the read-one/write-all scheme, a read
request can be performed by a single replica manager, whereas a write request must be
performed by all the replica managers in the group, as shown in Figure 18.9 (there can
be different numbers of replicas of the various objects). Quorum consensus schemes are
designed to reduce the number of replica managers that must perform update operations,
but at the expense of increasing the number of replica managers required to perform
read-only operations.
Another issue is whether the replica manager contacted by a front end should defer
the forwarding of update requests to other replica managers in the group until after a
transaction commits – the so-called lazy approach to update propagation – or,


===== page 822 =====
804 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.9 Transactions on replicated data
Client + front end Client + front end
T U
deposit(B,3);
getBalance(A)
B
Replica managers
Replica managers
A A A B B B
conversely, whether replica managers should forward each update request to all the
necessary replica managers within the transaction and before it commits – the eager
approach. The lazy approach is an attractive alternative because it reduces the amount
of communication between the replica managers that takes place before responding to
the updating client. However, concurrency control must also be considered. The lazy
approach is sometimes used in primary copy replication (see below), where a single
primary replica manager serializes the transactions. But if several different transactions
may attempt to access the same objects at different replica managers in a group, to
ensure that the transactions are correctly serialized at all the replica managers in the
group, each replica manager needs to know about the requests performed by the others.
The eager approach is the only one available in that case.
Thetwo-phasecommitprotocol • The two-phase commit protocol becomes a two-level
nested two-phase commit protocol. As before, the coordinator of a transaction
communicates with the workers. But if either the coordinator or a worker is a replica
manager, it will communicate with the other replica managers to which it passed
requests during the transaction.
That is, in the first phase, the coordinator sends canCommit? requests to the
workers, which pass them on to the other replica managers and collect their replies
before replying to the coordinator. In the second phase, the coordinator sends the
doCommit or doAbort request, which is passed on to the members of the groups of
replica managers.
Primarycopyreplication • Primary copy replication may be used in the context of
transactions. In this scheme, all client requests (whether or not they are read-only) are
directed to a single primary replica manager (see Figure 18.3). For primary copy
replication, concurrency control is applied at the primary. To commit a transaction, the
primary communicates with the backup replica managers and then, in the eager
approach, replies to the client. This form of replication allows a backup replica manager
to take over consistently if the primary fails. In the lazy alternative, the primary responds
to front ends before it has updated its backups. In that case, a backup that replaces a
failed front end will not necessarily have the latest state of the database.


===== page 823 =====
SECTION 18.5 TRANSACTIONS WITH REPLICATED DATA 805
Read-one/write-all • We use this simple replication scheme to illustrate how two-phase
locking at each replica manager can be used to achieve one-copy serializability, where
front ends may communicate with any replica manager. Every write operation must be
performed at all of the replica managers, each of which sets a write lock on the object
affected by the operation. Each read operation is performed by a single replica manager,
which sets a read lock on the object affected by the operation.
Consider pairs of operations of different transactions on the same object: any pair
ofwrite operations will require conflicting locks at all of the replica managers, while a
read operation and a write operation will require conflicting locks at a single replica
manager. Thus one-copy serializability is achieved.
18.5.2 Available copies replication
Simple read-one/write-all replication is not a realistic scheme, because it cannot be
carried out if some of the replica managers are unavailable, either because they have
crashed or because of a communication failure. The available copies scheme is designed
to allow for some replica managers being temporarily unavailable. The strategy is that a
client’s read request on a logical object may be performed by any available replica
manager but that a client’s update request must be performed by all available replica
managers in the group with copies of the object. The idea of the ‘available members of
a group of replica managers’ is similar to Coda’s available volume storage group,
described in Section 18.4.3.
In the normal case, client requests are received and performed by a functioning
replica manager. read requests can be performed by the replica manager that receives
them. write requests are performed by the receiving replica manager and all the other
available replica managers in the group. For example, in Figure 18.10, the getBalance
operation of transaction T is performed by X, whereas its deposit operation is performed
by M, N and P. Concurrency control at each replica manager affects the operations
performed locally. For example, at X, transaction T has read A and therefore transaction
U is not allowed to update A with the deposit operation until transaction T has
completed. So long as the set of available replica managers does not change, local
concurrency control achieves one-copy serializability in the same way as in read-
one/write-all replication. Unfortunately, this is not the case if a replica manager fails or
recovers during the progress of the conflicting transactions.
Replicamanagerfailure • We assume that replica managers fail benignly by crashing.
However, a crashed replica manager is replaced by a new process, which recovers the
committed state of the objects from a recovery file. Front ends use timeouts to decide
that a replica manager is not currently available. When a client makes a request to a
replica manager that has crashed, the front end times out and retries the request at
another replica manager in the group. If the request is received by a replica manager at
which the object is out of date because the replica manager has not completely recovered
from failure, the replica manager rejects the request and the front end retries the request
at another replica manager in the group.
One-copy serializability requires that crashes and recoveries be serialized with
respect to transactions. According to whether it can access an object or not, a transaction
observes that a failure occurs after it has finished or before it started. One-copy


===== page 824 =====
806 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.10 Available copies
Client + front end T U Client + front end
getBalance(B)
deposit(A,3);
getBalance(A)
Replica managers
deposit(B,3);
B
Replica managers M
A A B B
X Y P N
serializability is not achieved when different transactions make conflicting failure
observations.
Consider the case in Figure 18.10 where the replica manager X fails just after T
has performed getBalance and replica manager N fails just after U has performed
getBalance. Assume that both of these replica managers fail before T and U have
performed their deposit operations. This implies that T’s deposit will be performed at
replica managers M and P and U’s deposit will be performed at replica manager Y.
Unfortunately, the concurrency control on A at replica manager X does not prevent
transaction U from updating A at replica manager Y. Neither does the concurrency
control on B at replica manager N prevent transaction T updating B at replica managers
M and P.
This is contrary to the requirement for one-copy serializability. If these operations
were to be performed on single copies of the objects, they would be serialized either with
transaction T before U or with transaction U before T. This ensures that one of the
transactions will read the value set by the other. Local concurrency control on copies of
objects is not sufficient to ensure one-copy serializability in the available copies
replication scheme.
Aswrite operations are directed to all available copies, local concurrency control
does ensure that conflicting writes on an object are serialized. In contrast, a read by one
transaction and a write by another do not necessarily affect the same copy of an object.
Therefore, the scheme requires additional concurrency control to prevent the
dependencies between a read operation of one transaction and a write operation of
another transaction forming a cycle. Such dependencies cannot arise if the failures and
recoveries of replicas of objects are serialized with respect to transactions.
Localvalidation • We refer to the additional concurrency control procedure as local
validation. The local validation procedure is designed to ensure that any failure or
recovery event does not appear to happen during the progress of a transaction. In our
example, as T has read from an object at X,X’s failure must be after T. Similarly, as T
observes the failure of N when it attempts to update the object, N’s failure must be before
T. That is:


===== page 825 =====
SECTION 18.5 TRANSACTIONS WITH REPLICATED DATA 807
N fails (cid:111)(cid:3)T reads object A at X;T writes object B at M and P(cid:111)(cid:3)T(cid:3)commits (cid:111)(cid:3)X fails
It can also be argued for transaction U that:
X fails (cid:111)(cid:3)U reads object B at N;U writes objectA at Y(cid:111)(cid:3)U(cid:3)commits (cid:111)(cid:3)N fails
The local validation procedure ensures that two such incompatible sequences cannot
both occur. Before a transaction commits it checks for any failures (and recoveries) of
replica managers of objects it has accessed. In the example, transaction T would check
that N is still unavailable and X, M and P are still available. If this is the case, T can
commit. This implies that X fails after T validated and before U validated. In other
words,U’s validation is after T’s validation. U’s validation fails because N has already
failed.
Whenever a transaction has observed a failure, the local validation procedure
attempts to communicate with the failed replica managers to ensure that they have not
yet recovered. The other part of the local validation, which is testing that replica
managers have not failed since objects were accessed, can be combined with the two-
phase commit protocol.
Available copies algorithms cannot be used in environments in which functioning
replica managers are unable to communicate with one another.
18.5.3 Network partitions
Replication schemes need to take into account the possibility of network partitions. A
network partition separates a group of replica managers into two or more subgroups in
such a way that the members of one subgroup can communicate with one another but
members of different subgroups cannot communicate with one another. For example, in
Figure 18.11, the replica managers receiving the deposit request cannot send it to the
replica managers receiving the withdraw request.
Replication schemes are designed with the assumption that partitions will
eventually be repaired. Therefore, the replica managers within a single partition must
ensure that any requests that they execute during a partition will not make the set of
replicas inconsistent when the partition is repaired.
Figure 18.11 Network partition
Client + front end Client + front end
withdraw(B, 4) T Network U
partition
deposit(B,3);
B
Replica managers
B B B


===== page 826 =====
808 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Davidson et al. [1985] discuss many different approaches, which they categorize
as being either optimistic or pessimistic with regard to whether inconsistencies are likely
to occur. The optimistic schemes do not limit availability during a partition, whereas
pessimistic schemes do.
The optimistic approaches allow updates in all partitions – this can lead to
inconsistencies between partitions, which must be resolved when the partition is
repaired. An example of this approach is a variant of the available copies algorithm in
which updates are allowed in partitions and, after the partition has been repaired, the
updates are validated – any updates that break the one-copy serializability criterion are
aborted.
The pessimistic approach limits availability even when there are no partitions, but
it prevents any inconsistencies occurring during partitions. When a partition is repaired,
all that needs to be done is to update the copies of the objects. The quorum consensus
approach is pessimistic. It allows updates in the partition that has the majority of replica
managers and propagates the updates to the other replica managers when the partition is
repaired.
18.5.4 Available copies with validation
The available copies algorithm is applied within each partition. This optimistic approach
maintains the normal level of availability for read operations, even during partitions.
When a partition is repaired, the possibly conflicting transactions that have taken place
in the separate partitions are validated. If the validation fails, then some steps must be
taken to overcome the inconsistencies. If there had been no partition, one of a pair of
transactions with conflicting operations would have been delayed or aborted.
Unfortunately, as there has been a partition, pairs of conflicting transactions have been
allowed to commit in different partitions. The only choice after the event is to abort one
of them. This requires making changes in the objects and in some cases, compensating
effects in the real world, such as dealing with overdrawn bank accounts. The optimistic
approach is only feasible with applications where such compensating actions can be
taken.
Version vectors can be used to validate conflicts between pairs of write
operations. These are used in the Coda file system and are described in Section 18.4.3.
This approach cannot detect read-write conflicts but works well in file systems where
transactions tend to access a single file and read-write conflicts are unimportant. It is not
suitable for applications such as our banking example where read-write conflicts are
important.
Davidson [1984] used precedence graphs to detect inconsistencies between
partitions. Each partition maintains a log of the objects affected by the read and write
operations of transactions. This log is used to construct a precedence graph whose nodes
are transactions and whose edges represent conflicts between the read and write
operations of transactions. Such a graph will not contain any cycles, since concurrency
control has been applied within the partition. The validation procedure takes the
precedence graphs from the partitions and adds edges, representing conflicts, between
transactions in different partitions. If the resulting graph contains cycles, then the
validation fails.


===== page 827 =====
SECTION 18.5 TRANSACTIONS WITH REPLICATED DATA 809
18.5.5 Quorum consensus methods
One way of preventing transactions in different partitions from producing inconsistent
results is to make a rule that operations can be carried out within only one of the
partitions. As the replica managers in different partitions cannot communicate with one
another, the subgroup of replica managers within each partition must be able to decide
independently whether they are allowed to carry out operations. A quorum is a subgroup
of replica managers whose size gives it the right to carry out operations. For example, if
having a majority is the criterion, a subgroup that has the majority of the members of a
group would form a quorum because no other subgroup could have a majority.
In quorum consensus replication schemes an update operation on a logical object
may be completed successfully by a subgroup of its group of replica managers. The
other members of the group will therefore have out-of-date copies of the object. Version
numbers or timestamps may be used to determine whether copies are up-to-date. If
versions are used, the initial state of an object is the first version, and after each change
we have a new version. Each copy of an object has a version number, but only the copies
that are up-to-date have the current version number, whereas out-of-date copies have
earlier version numbers. Operations should be applied only to copies with the current
version number.
Gifford [1979] developed a file replication scheme in which a number of ‘votes’
are assigned to each physical copy at a replica manager of a single logical file. A vote
can be regarded as a weighting related to the desirability of using a particular copy. Each
read operation must first obtain a read quorum of R votes before it can proceed to read
from any up-to-date copy, and each write operation must obtain a write quorum of W
votes before it can proceed with an update operation. R and W are set for a group of
replica managers such that
W> half the total votes
R+W> total number of votes for the group
This ensures that any pair consisting of a read quorum and a write quorum or two write
quora must contain common copies. Therefore if there is a partition, it is not possible to
perform conflicting operations on the same copy, but in different partitions.
To perform a read operation, a read quorum is collected by making sufficient
version number enquiries to find a set of copies, the sum of whose votes is not less than
R. Not all of these copies need be up-to-date. Since each read quorum overlaps with
every write quorum, every read quorum is certain to include at least one current copy.
The read operation may be applied to any up-to-date copy.
To perform a write operation, a write quorum is collected by making sufficient
version number enquiries to find a set of replica managers with up-to-date copies, the
sum of whose votes is not less than W. If there are insufficient up-to-date copies, then a
non-current file is replaced with a copy of the current file, to enable the quorum to be
established. The updates specified in the write operation are then applied by each replica
manager in the write quorum, the version number is incremented and completion of the
write is reported to the client.
The files at the remaining available replica managers are then updated by
performing the write operation as a background task. Any replica manager whose copy
of the file has an older version number than the one used by the write quorum updates it


===== page 828 =====
810 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
by replacing the entire file with a copy obtained from a replica manager that is up-to-
date.
Two-phase read-write locking may be used for concurrency control in Gifford’s
replication scheme. The preliminary version number enquiry to obtain the read quorum,
R,causes read locks to be set at each replica manager contacted. When a write operation
is applied to the write quorum, W, a write lock is set at each replica manager involved.
(Locks are applied with the same granularity as version numbers.) The locks ensure one-
copy serializability, as any read quorum overlaps with any write quorum and any two
write quora overlap.
Configurabilityofgroupsofreplicamanagers • An important property of the weighted
voting algorithm is that groups of replica managers can be configured to provide
different performance or reliability characteristics. Once the general reliability and
performance of a group of replica managers is established by its voting configuration,
the reliability and performance of write operations may be increased by decreasing W
and similarly for reads by decreasing R.
The algorithm can also allow for the use of copies of files on local disks at client
computers as well as those at file servers. The copies of files in client computers are
regarded as weak representatives and are always allocated zero votes. This ensures that
they are not included in any quorum. A read operation may be performed at any up-to-
date copy, once a read quorum has been obtained. Therefore a read operation may be
carried out on the local copy of the file if it is up-to-date. Weak representatives can be
used to speed up read operations.
AnexamplefromGifford • Gifford gives three examples showing the range of
properties that can be achieved by allocating weights to the various replica managers in
a group and assigning R and W appropriately. We now reproduce Gifford’s examples,
which are based on the table below. The blocking probabilities give an indication of the
probability that a quorum cannot be obtained when a read orwrite request is made. They
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3
Latency Replica 1 75 75 75
(milliseconds) Replica 2 65 100 750
Replica 3 65 750 750
Voting Replica 1 1 2 1
configuration Replica 2 0 1 1
Replica 3 0 1 1
Quorum R 1 2 1
sizes W 1 3 3
Derived performance of file suite:
Read Latency 65 75 75
Blocking probability 0.01 0.0002 0.000001
Write Latency 75 100 750
Blocking probability 0.01 0.0101 0.03


===== page 829 =====
SECTION 18.5 TRANSACTIONS WITH REPLICATED DATA 811
are calculated assuming that there is a 0.01 probability that any single replica manager
will be unavailable at the time of a request.
Example 1 is configured for a file with a high read-to-write ratio in an application
with several weak representatives and a single replica manager. Replication is used to
enhance the performance of the system, not the reliability. There is one replica manager
on the local network that can be accessed in 75 milliseconds. Two clients have chosen
to make weak representatives on their local disks, which they can access in 65
milliseconds, resulting in lower latency and less network traffic.
Example 2 is configured for a file with a moderate read-to-write ratio, which is
accessed primarily from one local network. The replica manager on the local network is
assigned two votes and the replica managers on the remote networks are assigned one
vote apiece. Reads can be satisfied from the local replica manager, but writes must
access the local replica manager and one remote replica manager. The file will remain
available in read-only mode if the local replica manager fails. Clients could create local
weak representatives for lower read latency.
Example 3 is configured for a file with a very high read-to-write ratio, such as a
system directory in a three-replica-manager environment. Clients can read from any
replica manager, and the probability that the file will be unavailable is small. Updates
must be applied to all copies. Once again, clients could create weak representatives on
their local machines for lower read latency.
The main disadvantage of quorum consensus is that the performance of read
operations is degraded by the need to collect a read quorum from R replica managers.
Herlihy [1986] proposed an extension of the quorum consensus method for
abstract data types. This method allows the semantics of operations to be taken into
account, to increase the availability of objects. Herlihy’s method uses timestamps
instead of version numbers. This has the advantage that there is no need to make version
number enquiries in order to get a new version number before performing a write
operation. The main advantage claimed by Herlihy is that the use of semantic knowledge
can increase the number of choices for a quorum.
Quorum consensus in Dynamo • Dynamo uses a quorum-like approach for maintaining
consistency amongst the replicas. As with Gifford’s scheme, read and write operations
must use R and W nodes respectively and R+W>N. In Dynamo, N is the number of
nodes with replicas. The values of W and R affect availability, durability and
consistency. DeCandia et al. [2007] state that a common configuration in Dynamo has
[N,R,W] = [3,2,2].
In the case of partition, Gifford’s quorum can operate only in a ‘majority’
partition. But Dynamo uses a ‘sloppy quorum’ that involves N nodes, where replicas
may be stored at substitute nodes that will pass on the values when the intended node
recovers.
18.5.6 Virtual partition algorithm
This algorithm, which was proposed by El Abbadi et al. [1985], combines the quorum
consensus approach with the available copies algorithm. Quorum consensus works
correctly in the presence of partitions but the available copies algorithm is less
expensive for read operations. A virtual partition is an abstraction of a real partition and
contains a set of replica managers. Note that the term ‘network partition’ refers to the


===== page 830 =====
812 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.12 Two network partitions
Network partition
Transaction T
Replica managers
X V Y Z
barrier that divides replica managers into several parts, whereas the term ‘virtual
partition’ refers to the parts themselves. Although they are not connected with multicast
communication, virtual partitions are similar to group views, which we introduced in
Section 18.2.2. A transaction can operate in a virtual partition if it contains sufficient
replica managers to have a read quorum and a write quorum for the objects accessed. In
this case, the transaction uses the available copies algorithm. This has the advantage that
read operations need only ever access a single copy of an object and may enhance
performance by choosing the ‘nearest’ copy. If a replica manager fails and the virtual
partition changes during a transaction, then the transaction is aborted. This ensures one-
copy serializability of transactions because all transactions that survive see the failures
and recoveries of replica managers in the same order.
Whenever a member of a virtual partition detects that it cannot access one of the
other members – for example, when a write operation is not acknowledged – it attempts
to create a new virtual partition with a view to obtaining a virtual partition with read and
write quora.
Suppose, for example, that we have four replica managers, V,X,Y and Z, each of
which has one vote, and that the read and write quora are R = 2 and W = 3. Initially, all
the managers can contact one another. So long as they remain in contact, they can use
the available copies algorithm. For example, a transaction T consisting of a read
followed by a write operation will perform the read at a single replica manager (for
example,V) and the write operation at all four of them.
Suppose that transaction T starts by performing its read at V at a time when V is
still in contact with X,Y and Z. Now suppose that a network partition occurs as in Figure
18.12, in which V and X are in one part and Y and Z are in different ones. Then when
transaction T attempts to apply its write,V will notice that it cannot contact Y and Z.
When a replica manager cannot contact managers that it could previously contact,
itkeeps on trying until it can create a new virtual partition. For example, V will keep on
trying to contact Y and Z until one or both of them replies – as, for example, in Figure
18.13, when Y can be accessed. The group of replica managers V,X and Y comprise a
virtual partition because they are sufficient to form read and write quora.
When a new virtual partition is created during a transaction that has performed an
operation at one of the replica managers (such as transaction T), the transaction must be
aborted. In addition, the replicas within a new virtual partition must be brought up-to-
date by copying them from other replicas. Version numbers can be used as in Gifford’s
algorithm to determine which copies are up-to-date. It is essential that all replicas be up-
to-date, because read operations are performed on any single replica.


===== page 831 =====
SECTION 18.5 TRANSACTIONS WITH REPLICATED DATA 813
Figure 18.13 Virtual partition
Virtual partition Network partition
Replica managers
X V Y Z
Implementationofvirtualpartitions • A virtual partition has a creation time, a set of
potential members and a set of actual members. Creation times are logical timestamps.
The actual members of a particular virtual partition have the same idea as to its creation
time and membership (a shared view of the replica managers with which they can
communicate). For example, in Figure 18.13 the potential members are V,X,Y, andZ
and the actual members are V,X and Y.
The creation of a new virtual partition is achieved by a cooperative protocol
carried out by those of the potential members that can be accessed by the replica
managers that initiated it. Several replica managers may attempt to create a new virtual
partition simultaneously. For example, suppose that the replica managers Y and Z shown
inFigure 18.12 keep making attempts tocontact the others, and after a while the network
partition is partially repaired so that Y cannot communicate with Z but the two groups V,
X,Y and V,X,Z can communicate among themselves. Then there is a danger that two
overlapping virtual partitions, such as V and V shown in Figure 18.14, might both be
1 2
created.
Consider the effect of executing different transactions in the two virtual partitions.
Theread operation of the transaction in V,X,Y might be applied at the replica manager
Y, in which case its read lock will not conflict with write locks set by a write operation
of a transaction in the other virtual partition. Overlapping virtual partitions are contrary
to one-copy serializability.
The aim of the protocol is to create new virtual partitions consistently, even if real
partitions occur during the protocol. The protocol for creating a new virtual partition has
two phases, as shown in Figure 18.15.
A replica manager that replies Yesin phase 1 does not belong to a virtual partition
until it receives the corresponding Confirmation message in phase 2.
Figure 18.14 Two overlapping virtual partitions
Virtual partition V Virtual partition V
1 2
Y X V Z


===== page 832 =====
814 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
Figure 18.15 Creating a virtual partition
Phase 1:
(cid:129) The initiator sends a Join request to each potential member. The argument of Join
is a proposed logical timestamp for the new virtual partition.
(cid:129) When a replica manager receives a Join request, it compares the proposed logical
timestamp with that of its current virtual partition.
– If the proposed logical timestamp is greater it agrees to join and replies Yes;
– If it is less, it refuses to join and replies No.
Phase 2:
(cid:129) If the initiator has received sufficient Yes replies to have read and write quora, it
may complete the creation of the new virtual partition by sending a Confirmation
message to the sites that agreed to join. The creation timestamp and list of actual
members are sent as arguments.
(cid:129) Replica managers receiving the Confirmation message join the new virtual
partition and record its creation timestamp and list of actual members.
In our example above, the replica managers Y and Z shown in Figure 18.12 each
attempt to create a virtual partition, and whichever one has the higher logical timestamp
will be the one that is used in the end.
This is an effective method when partitions are not a common occurrence. Each
transaction uses the available copies algorithm within a virtual partition.
18.6 Summary
Replicating objects is an important means of achieving services with good performance,
high availability and fault tolerance in a distributed system. We described architectures
for services in which replica managers hold replicas of objects, and in which front ends
make this replication transparent. Clients, front ends and replica managers may be
separate processes or exist in the same address space.
The chapter began by describing a system model in which each logical object is
implemented by a set of physical replicas. Often, updates to these replicas can be made
conveniently by group communication. We expanded our account of group
communication to include group views and view-synchronous communication.
We defined linearizability and sequential consistency as correctness criteria for
fault-tolerant services. These criteria express how the services must provide the
equivalent of a single image of the set of logical objects, even though those objects are
replicated. The most practically significant of the criteria is sequential consistency.
In passive (primary-backup) replication, fault tolerance is achieved by directing
all requests through a distinguished replica manager and having a backup replica
manager take over if this fails. In active replication, all replica managers process all
requests independently. Both forms of replication can be conveniently implemented
using group communication.


===== page 833 =====
SECTION 18.6 SUMMARY 815
Next we considered highly available services. Gossip and Bayou both allow
clients to make updates to local replicas while partitioned. In each system, replica
managers exchange updates with one another when they become reconnected. Gossip
provides its highest availability at the expense of relaxed, causal consistency. Bayou
provides stronger eventual consistency guarantees, employing automatic conflict
detection and the technique of operational transformation to resolve conflicts. Coda is a
highly available file system that uses version vectors to detect potentially conflicting
updates.
Finally, we considered the performance of transactions against replicated data.
Both primary-backup architectures and architectures in which front ends may
communicate with any replica manager exist for this case. We discussed how
transactional systems allow for replica manager failures and network partitions. The
techniques of available copies, quorum consensus and virtual partitions enable
operations within transactions to make progress even in some circumstances where not
all replicas are reachable.
EXERCISES
18.1 Three computers together provide a replicated service. The manufacturers claim that
each computer has a mean time between failure of five days; a failure typically takes
four hours to fix. What is the availability of the replicated service? page 766
18.2 Explain why a multi-threaded server might not qualify as a state machine. page 768
18.3 In a multi-user game, the players move figures around a common scene. The state of the
game is replicated at the players’ workstations and at a server, which contains services
controlling the game as a whole, such as collision detection. Updates are multicast to all
replicas. Consider the following conditions:
i) The figures may throw projectiles at one another, and a hit debilitates the
unfortunate recipient for a limited time. What type of update ordering is required
here? Hint: consider the ‘throw’, ‘collide’ and ‘revive’ events.
ii) The game incorporates magic devices that may be picked up by a player to assist
them. What type of ordering should be applied to the ‘pick-up-device’ operation?
page 770
18.4 A router separating process p from two others, q and r, fails immediately after p initiates
the multicasting of message m. If the group communication system is view-
synchronous, explain what happens to p next. page 773
18.5 You are given a group communication system with a totally ordered multicast operation
and a failure detector. Is it possible to construct view-synchronous group
communication from these components alone? page 773
18.6 A sync-ordered multicast operation is one whose delivery ordering semantics are the
same as those for delivering views in a view-synchronous group communication system.
In a thingumajig service, operations upon thingumajigs are causally ordered. The
service supports lists of users able to perform operations on each particular thingumajig.
Explain why removing a user from a list should be a sync-ordered operation. page 773
18.7 What is the consistency issue raised by state transfer? page 774


===== page 834 =====
816 CHAPTER 18 REPLICATION
18.8 An operation X upon an object o causes o to invoke an operation upon another object o(cid:99).
It is now proposed to replicate o but not o(cid:99). Explain the difficulty that this raises
concerning invocations upon o(cid:99), and suggest a solution. page 773
18.9 Explain the difference between linearizability and sequential consistency, and why the
latter is more practical to implement, in general. page 777
18.10 Explain why allowing backups to process read operations leads to sequentially
consistent rather than linearizable executions in a passive replication system. page 780
18.11 Could the gossip architecture be used for a distributed computer game like the one
described in Exercise 18.3? page783
18.12 In the gossip architecture, why does a replica manager need to keep both a ‘replica’
timestamp and a ‘value’ timestamp? page 786
18.13 In a gossip system, a front end has the vector timestamp (3,5,7) representing the data it
has received from members of a group of three replica managers. The three replica
managers have vector timestamps (5,2,8), (4,5,6) and (4,5,8), respectively. Which
replica manager(s) could immediately satisfy a query from the front end, and what
would the resultant timestamp of the front end be? Which could incorporate an update
from the front end immediately? page 788
18.14 Explain why making some replica managers read-only may improve the performance of
a gossip system. page 792
18.15 Write pseudo-code for dependency checks and merge procedures (as used in Bayou)
suitable for a simple room-booking application. page 793
18.16 In the Coda file system, why is it sometimes necessary for users to intervene manually
in the process of updating the copies of a file at multiple servers? page 800
18.17 Devise a scheme for integrating two replicas of a file system directory that underwent
separate updates during disconnected operation. Either use Bayou’s operational
transformation approach, or supply a solution for Coda. page 801
18.18 Available copies replication is applied to data items A and B with replicas A ,A and
x y
B ,B . The transactions T and U are defined as:
m n
T: Read(A);Write(B,44). U:Read(B);Write(A, 55).
Show an interleaving of T and U, assuming that two-phase locks are applied to the
replicas. Explain why locks alone cannot ensure one-copy serializability if one of the
replicas fails during the progress of T and U. Explain with reference to this example how
local validation ensures one-copy serializability. page 805
18.19 Gifford’s quorum consensus replication is in use at servers X,Y and Z, which all hold
replicas of data items A and B. The initial values of all replicas of A and B are 100 and
the votes for A and B are 1 at each of X,Y and Z. Also, R = W = 2 for both A and B. A
client reads the value of A and then writes it to B.
i) At the time the client performs these operations, a partition separates servers X and
Y from server Z. Describe the quora obtained and the operations that take place if
the client can access servers X and Y.
ii) Describe the quora obtained and the operations that take place if the client can
access only server Z.
iii) The partition is repaired and then another partition occurs so that X and Z are
separated from Y. Describe the quora obtained and the operations that take place
if the client can access servers X and Z. page 810


===== page 835 =====
19
MOBILE AND (cid:3)
UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
19.1 Introduction
19.2 Association
19.3 Interoperation
19.4 Sensing and context awareness
19.5 Security and privacy
19.6 Adaptation
19.7 Case study: Cooltown
19.8 Summary
This chapter surveys the fields of mobile and ubiquitous computing, which have come
about due to advances in device miniaturization and wireless connectivity. Broadly
speaking, mobile computing is concerned with exploiting the connectedness of portable
devices; ubiquitous computing is about exploiting the increasing integration of computing
devices with our everyday physical world.
The chapter introduces a common system model that stresses the volatility of
mobile and ubiquitous systems – i.e., that the set of users, devices and software
components in any given environment is liable to change frequently. The chapter then
surveys some of the chief areas of research that come about because of this volatility and
the physical bases for it. We explore topics including: how software components come to
associate and interoperate with one another as entities move, fail or spontaneously
appear; how systems become integrated with the physical world through sensing and
context awareness; the security and privacy issues that arise in volatile, physically
integrated systems; and techniques for adapting to small devices’ lack of computational
and I/O resources. The chapter ends with a case study of the Cooltown project, a
human-oriented, web-based architecture for mobile and ubiquitous computing.
817


===== page 836 =====
818 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
19.1 Introduction
Mobile and ubiquitous computing have come about due to device miniaturization and
wireless connectivity. Broadly speaking, mobile computing is concerned with
exploiting the connectedness of devices that move around in the everyday physical
world; ubiquitous computing is about exploiting the increasing integration of computing
devices with our everyday physical world. As devices become smaller, we are better
able to carry them around with us or wear them, and we can embed them into many parts
of the physical world – not just the familiar desktop or a server rack. And as wireless
connectivity becomes more prevalent, we are better able to connect these new small
devices to one another, and to conventional personal and server computers.
This chapter surveys aspects of mobile computing (a subject already touched upon
in Chapter 18’s treatment of disconnected operation) and ubiquitous computing. The
chapter concentrates on their common properties, and on the differences they share from
more conventional distributed systems. Given progress to date, the focus is more on
open issues than solutions.
The chapter first outlines the beginnings of mobile and ubiquitous computing, and
introduces the subfields known as wearable, handheld and context-aware computing. It
then describes a system model that encompasses all of those fields and subfields through
their volatility – that is, the fact that the set of users, devices and software components
in any given environment is liable to change frequently. We survey the system
components that have emerged to deal with volatility and the physical bases for
volatility, including how software components come to associate and interoperate with
one another as entities move, fail or spontaneously appear in environments; how
systems become integrated with the physical world through sensing and context
awareness; the security and privacy issues that arise in systems integrated in the physical
world; and techniques for adapting to small devices’ limited computational and
input/output resources. The chapter ends with a case study of the Cooltown project, a
human-oriented, web-based architecture for mobile and ubiquitous computing.
Mobile and hand-held computing • Mobile computing arose as a paradigm in which
users could carry their personal computers and retain some connectivity to other
machines. In about 1980 it became possible to build personal computers that were just
about light enough to carry, and that could be connected to other computers over
telephone lines via a modem. Technological evolution has led to more or less the same
idea but with far better functionality and performance: the present-day equivalent is a
laptop, netbook or tablet computer, each with several forms of wireless connectivity
including cellular networks, WiFi and Bluetooth.
A different path of technological evolution has led to handheld computing: the use
of devices that fit in the hand, including ‘smart’ mobile phones (smart phones), personal
digital assistants (PDAs) and other, more specialized hand-operated devices. Smart
phones and PDAs are capable of running many different types of applications, but
compared to laptops they trade off their smaller size and better battery running time
against correspondingly limited processing power, a smaller screen and other resource
restrictions. Manufacturers are increasingly equipping handheld devices with the same
range of wireless connectivity as laptops and their somewhat smaller equivalents.


===== page 837 =====
SECTION 19.1 INTRODUCTION 819
An interesting trend in handheld computing has been the blurring of distinctions
between PDAs, mobile phones and purpose-built handheld devices such as cameras and
GPS-based navigation units. Smart phones have PDA-like computing functionality by
virtue of running operating systems such as Symbian from Nokia and other
manufacturers, Google’s Android, Apple’s iOS or Windows Phone 7 from Microsoft.
They have cameras built in and either incorporate or can be equipped with other types
of specialized attachment, making them an alternative to purpose-built handheld
devices. For example, a user can read a barcode via a smart phone’s camera to obtain
price-comparison information. Smart phones also often have built-in GPS units for
navigation and other location-specific purposes.
Stojmenovic [2002] covers principles and protocols for wireless communication,
including coverage of two major network-layer problems that need to be solved for the
systems studied in this chapter. The first problem is how to provide continuous
connectivity for mobile devices that pass in and out of range of base stations, which are
infrastructure components that provide regions of wireless coverage. The second
problem is how to enable collections of devices to wirelessly communicate with one
another in places where there is no infrastructure (see the brief treatment of ad hoc
networks in Section 19.4.2). Both problems arise because direct wireless connectivity is
often not available between two given devices. Communication then has to be achieved
over several wireless or wired network segments. Two main factors lead to this
subdivided wireless coverage. First, the greater the range of a wireless network is, the
more devices will compete for its limited bandwidth. Second, energy considerations
apply: the energy needed to transmit a wireless signal is proportional to the square of its
range, but many of the devices we shall consider have limited energy capacity.
Ubiquitous computing • Mark Weiser coined the term ubiquitous computing in 1988
[Weiser 1991]. Ubiquitous computing is also sometimes known as pervasive computing,
and the two terms are usually taken to be synonymous. ‘Ubiquitous’ means ‘to be found
everywhere’. Weiser saw the increasing prevalence of computing devices as leading to
revolutionary shifts in the way we would use computers.
First, he predicted that each person in the world would utilize many computers.
We can compare this to the personal computing revolution before it, which pursued the
goal of one computer to each person. Although it sounds simple, that change had a
dramatic effect on the way we use computers compared to the mainframe era before it,
when there was one computer to many people. Weiser’s idea of ‘one person, many
computers’ means something very different to the common situation in which we each
have several computers that are more or less alike – one at work, one at home, a laptop
and perhaps a smart phone we carry with us. Rather, in ubiquitous computing,
computers multiply in form and function, not just in number, to suit different tasks.
For example, suppose that all the inert display and writing surfaces in a room –
whiteboards, books, pieces of paper, Post-it notes, etc. – were replaced by tens or
hundreds of individual computers with electronic displays. Books already appear in an
electronic form, viewable on devices that allow readers to read and search their text,
look up the meaning of words, search for related ideas on the Web and experience linked
multimedia content. Now suppose we embed computing functionality in all the writing
implements. For example, pens and markers become able to store what the user has
written and drawn, and to collect, copy and move multimedia content between the many


===== page 838 =====
820 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.1 A room responding to a user wearing an active badge
2. Infrared sensor detects user’s ID
User’s ID
3. Display responds Hello Roy 1. User enters room wearing
to user active badge
Infrared
computers lying around. That scenario raises usability and economic issues, and it
touches on only one small part of our lives; but it gives us an idea of what ‘computing
everywhere’ might be like.
The second shift that Weiser predicted was that computers would ‘disappear’ –
that they would ‘weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are
indistinguishable from it’. This is largely a psychological notion, comparable to how
people take furniture for granted and barely notice it. It reflects the idea that computing
will become embedded in what we think of as everyday items – ones we don’t normally
think of as having computational capabilities, any more than we think of washing
machines or vehicles as ‘computing devices’, even though embedded microprocessors
control them (about 100 microprocessors, in the case of some cars).
While the invisibility of certain devices is appropriate – for example, in cases such
asthe computer systems embedded in a car – that is not the case for all the devices we
shall consider, particularly the devices that mobile users typically carry. For example,
mobile phones are some of the most pervasive devices at the time of writing, but their
computational ability is hardly invisible and neither, arguably, should it be.
Wearable computing • Users carry wearable computing devices on their person, either
attached to or within the fabric of their clothes, or worn like watches, jewellery or
spectacles on their body. Unlike the handheld devices we mentioned above, these
devices often operate without the user having to manipulate them. They typically have
specialized functionality. An early example is the ‘active badge’, a small computing
device clipped to the user’s clothing that regularly broadcasts its identity (which is
associated with a user) via an infrared transmitter [Want et al. 1992, Harter and Hopper
1994]. Devices in the environment respond to the badge’s transmissions, and so respond
to the presence of a user; the infrared transmissions have a limited range, so they will be
picked up only if the user is nearby. For example, an electronic display could adapt to
the presence of a user by customizing its behaviour according to that user’s preferences,
perhaps altering the default drawing colour and line thickness (Figure 19.1). Similarly,
a room could adapt the air conditioning and lightingsettings according to the recorded
preferences of the person within it.
Context-aware computing • The active badge – or rather, other devices’ reactions to its
presence – exemplifies context-aware computing, which is an important subfield of
mobile and ubiquitous computing. This is where computer systems automatically adapt


===== page 839 =====
SECTION 19.1 INTRODUCTION 821
their behaviour according to physical circumstances. Those circumstances can in
principle be anything physically measurable or detectable, such as the presence of a user,
the time of day or atmospheric conditions. Some of the dependent conditions are
relatively straightforward to determine, such as whether it is nighttime (discernable from
the time, day of the year and geographic position). But others require sophisticated
processing to detect. For example, consider a context-aware mobile phone that is to ring
only when it is appropriate. In particular, it should automatically switch itself to
‘vibrate’ instead of ‘ring’ when it is in the cinema. But detecting that the user is watching
a film inside a cinema, as opposed to standing in the cinema lobby, is non-trivial given
the inaccuracies in position sensor measurements. Section 19.4 examines context in
more detail.
19.1.1 Volatile systems
From the point of view of distributed systems, there is no essential difference between
mobile and ubiquitous computing or the subfields we have introduced (or indeed the
subfields we have left out, such as tangible computing [Ishii and Ullmer 1997] and
augmented reality, as exemplified by Wellner’s digital desk [Wellner 1991]). In this
section we give a model of what we shall call volatile systems that encompasses the
essential distributed systems features of all of them.
We call the systems described in this chapter ‘volatile’ because, unlike most of the
systems described elsewhere in this book, certain changes are common rather than
exceptional. The set of users, hardware and software in mobile and ubiquitous systems
is highly dynamic and changes unpredictably. Another word we shall sometimes use for
these systems is spontaneous, which appears in the literature in the phrase spontaneous
networking. The relevant forms of volatility include:
(cid:129) failures of devices and communication links;
(cid:129) changes in the characteristics of communication such as bandwidth;
(cid:129) the creation and destruction of associations – logical communication relationships
– between software components resident on the devices.
Here the term ‘component’ encompasses any software unit, such as objects or processes,
regardless of whether it interoperates as a client or server or peer.
Chapter 18 has already provided ways of dealing with some of those changes,
namely processing failures and disconnected operation. But the solutions considered
there were predicated on processing and communication failures being the exception
rather than the rule, and on the existence of redundant processing resources. Volatile
systems not only break those assumptions but also add yet more change phenomena,
notably the frequent changes in associations between components.
It is worth clearing up a possible misunderstanding before we go further.
Volatility is not a defining property of mobile and ubiquitous systems: there are other
types of system that demonstrate one or more forms of volatility but are neither mobile
nor ubiquitous. A good example is peer-to-peer computing, such as file-sharing
applications (Chapter 10), in which the set of participating processes and the
associations between them are subject to high rates of change. What is different about
mobile and ubiquitous computing is that they exhibit all of the above forms of volatility,


===== page 840 =====
822 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
due to the way they are integrated with the physical world. We shall have much to say
about this physical integration and how it causes volatility. But physical integration is
not itself a distributed systems property, whereas volatility is. Hence, that is the term we
adopt.
In the remainder of this section we describe smart spaces, which are environments
within which volatile systems subsist, and we characterize mobile and ubiquitous
devices, their physical and logical connectivity, and the consequences in terms of
lowered trust and privacy.
Smart spaces • Physical spaces are important in that they form the background to
mobile and ubiquitous computing. Mobility takes place between physical spaces;
ubiquitous computing is embedded in physical spaces. A smart space is any physical
place with embedded services – that is, services provided only or principally within that
physical space. It is possible to introduce computing devices into the wild, where no
infrastructure exists, to perform an application such as environmental monitoring. But
more typically mobile devices and ubiquitous systems exist at any one time in a
computationally enhanced part of a built or vehicular environment such as a room,
building, town square or train carriage. In those cases, the smart space typically contains
a relatively stable computing infrastructure, which may include conventional server
computers; devices such as printers, displays, sensors and a wireless networking
infrastructure, including a connection to the Internet.
There are several types of movement or ‘appearance and disappearance’ that can
occur in smart spaces. First, there is physical mobility. Smart spaces act as environments
for devices that visit and leave them. Users bring in and depart with devices they carry
or wear; robotic devices may even move themselves into and out of the space. Second,
there is logical mobility. A mobile process or agent may move into or out of a smart
space, or to or from a user’s personal device. Also, a device’s physical movement may
cause the logical movement of components within it. However, whether or not a
component moves due to its device’s physical movement, logical mobility has not
occurred in any interesting sense unless the component changes some of its associations
with other components as a result. Third, users may add relatively static devices such as
media players as longer-term additions to the space, and correspondingly withdraw
older devices from it. Consider, for example, the evolution of a smart home whose
occupants vary the set of devices within it [Edwards and Grinter 2001] in a relatively
unplanned way over time. Fourth and finally, devices may fail and thus ‘disappear’ from
a space.
Some of those phenomena seem similar from the distributed systems perspective.
In each case, either a software component appears in a pre-existing smart space and, if
anything of interest is to result, becomes integrated (at least temporarily) into that space;
or a component disappears from the space, either through mobility or because it is
simply switched off or fails. It may or may not be possible for any particular component
to distinguish ‘infrastructure’ devices from ‘visiting’ devices.
However, there are significant distinctions to be drawn when designing a system.
An important difference that may arise between volatile systems is the rate of change.
Algorithms that have to cope with a handful of appearing or disappearing components a
day (e.g., in a smart home) may be very differently designed from those for which there
is at least one such change occurring at any one time (e.g., a system implemented using


===== page 841 =====
SECTION 19.1 INTRODUCTION 823
Bluetooth communication between mobile phones in a crowded city). Moreover, while
all the above appearance and disappearance phenomena appear similar to a first
approximation, there are of course important differences. For example, from the security
point of view, it is one thing for a user’s device to enter a smart space and another for an
outside software component to move to an infrastructure device belonging to the space.
Device model • With the rise of mobile and ubiquitous computing, a new class of
computing device is becoming a part of distributed systems. This device is limited in its
energy supply and computing resources, and it may have ways of interfacing with the
physical world: sensors such as light detectors, and/or actuators such as a programmable
means of movement. Our device model must therefore take into accout the following
characteristics:
Limited energy: A device that is portable or embedded in the physical world
typically has to run on batteries, and the smaller and lighter the device needs to be,
the lower its battery capacity will be. Replacing or recharging those batteries is liable
to be inconvenient in terms of time (there may be hundreds of such devices per user)
and physical access. Computation and access to memory and other forms of storage
all consume precious energy. Wireless communication is particularly
energy-intensive. Moreover, the energy consumed by receiving a message can
amount to a substantial fraction of that required to transmit it; even when in ‘standby’
mode, in which a network interface is ready to receive a message, can require
appreciable power consumption [Shih et al. 2002]. So, if a device is to last as long as
possible on a given level of battery charge, algorithms need to be sensitive to the
energy they consume, especially in terms of their message complexity. But
ultimately, the probability of device failure is increased because of battery discharge.
Resource constraints: Mobile and ubiquitous devices have limited computational
resources in terms of processor speed, storage capacity and network bandwidth. This
is in part because energy consumption increases as we improve those characteristics.
But also, making devices portable or embedding them into everyday physical objects
entails making them physically small, which, given limitations imposed by
manufacturing processes, restricts the number of transistors in the nodes. Two issues
spring from this: how to design algorithms that can execute on the node in reasonable
time despite the resource limitations; and how to augment the node’s meagre
resources using resources in its environment.
Sensors and actuators: To enable their integration with the physical world – in
particular, to make them context-aware – devices are equipped with sensors and
actuators. Sensors are devices that measure physical parameters and supply their
values to software. Conversely, actuators are software-controllable devices that
affect the physical world. A wide variety of each type of component exists. On the
sensor side, for example, there are sensors that measure position, orientation, load,
and light and sound levels. Actuators include programmable air-conditioning
controllers and motors. An important issue for sensors is accuracy, which is quite
limited and so can lead to spurious behaviour, such as an inappropriate response to
what turns out to be the wrong location. Inaccuracy is likely to remain a characteristic
of devices that are cheap enough to deploy ubiquitously.


===== page 842 =====
824 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
The devices described above may sound somewhat exotic. However, not only are they
commercially available, but they are even mass-produced. Two examples are motes and
smart phones.
Motes: Motes [Hill et al. 2000, www.xbow.com] are small devices intended for
autonomous operation in applications such as environmental sensing. They are
designed to be embedded in an environment, programmed so that they wirelessly
discover one another and transfer sensed values amongst themselves. If, for example,
there is a forest fire, then one or more motes scattered around the forest could sense
abnormally high temperatures and communicate those, via their peers, to a more
powerful device capable of communicating the situation to the emergency services.
The most basic form of mote has a low-power processor (a microcontroller) that runs
the TinyOS operating system [Culler et al. 2001] on internal flash memory, memory
for data-logging and a short-range, two-way ‘Industrial, Scientific and Medical’
(ISM) band radio transceiver. A variety of sensor modules may be added. Motes are
also known as ‘smart dust’, reflecting the tiny size ultimately intended for these
devices, although their size at the time of writing is around 6(cid:117)(cid:3)3(cid:117)(cid:3)1 cm, excluding
battery pack and sensors. Smart-its provide similar functionality to motes in a similar
form-factor [www.smart-its.org]. Section 19.4.2 discusses the uses of mote-like
devices in wireless sensor networks.
Smart phones: Smart phones are a quite different example of a device in the systems
we are considering. Their principal functions are human communication and
imaging. But, running an operating system such as Symbian, Android or iOS, they
are programmable for quite a wide variety of applications. In addition to their wide
area data connectivity, they often have infrared (IrDA) or Bluetooth short-range
wireless network interfaces that enable them to connect to one another, to PCs and to
auxiliary devices. They often contain sensing devices, such as GPS sensors for
determining their location, magnetometers to sense their orientation, and
accelerometers to sense their state of motion. Moreover, they may run software to
recognize symbols such as barcodes from their camera images, making them sensors
of ‘coded values’ on physical objects such as products, which can be used to access
associated services. For example, a user could use their camera phone to discover the
specifications of a product in a shop from the barcode on its box [Kindberg 2002].
Volatile connectivity • The devices of interest in this chapter all have some form of
wireless connectivity, and may have several. The connection technologies (Bluetooth,
WiFi, 3G, etc.) vary in their nominal bandwidth and latency, in their energy costs and in
whether there are financial costs to communication. But the volatility of connectivity –
the variability at runtime of the state of connection or disconnection between devices,
and the quality of service between them – also has a strong impact on system properties.
Connectivity issues include:
Disconnection: Wireless disconnections are far more likely than wired
disconnections. Many of the devices we have described are mobile, and so may
exceed their operating distance from other devices or encounter radio occlusions
between them, e.g. from buildings. Even when the devices are static, there may be
moving users and vehicles that cause disconnection by occlusion. There is also the
question of multi-hop wireless routing between devices. In ad hoc routing, a


===== page 843 =====
SECTION 19.1 INTRODUCTION 825
Figure 19.2 Examples of preconfigured versus spontaneous association
Preconfigured Spontaneous
Service-driven: Human-driven:
email client and server web browser and web servers
Data-driven:
P2P file-sharing applications
Physically driven:
mobile and ubiquitous systems
collection of devices communicate with one another without reliance on any other
device: they collaborate to route all packets between themselves. Taking our example
of motes in a forest, a mote might continue to be able to communicate with all other
motes in immediate radio range, but fail to be able to communicate its
high-temperature reading to the emergency services because of the failure of more
distant motes through which all packets had to pass.
Variable bandwidth and latency: The factors that can lead to complete disconnec-
tion can also lead to highly varying bandwidth and latency, because they entail
changing error rates. As the error rate increases, more and more packets are dropped.
That leads intrinsically to low throughput rates. But the situation may be exacerbated
by timeouts in higher-layer protocols. Timeout values are difficult to adapt to dramat-
ically changing conditions. If they are too big compared to current error conditions,
latency and throughput suffer. If they are too small, they may increase congestion and
waste energy.
Spontaneous interoperation • In a volatile system, components routinely change the set
of components they communicate with, as they move or as other components appear in
their environment. We use the term association for the logical relationship formed when
at least one of a given pair of components communicates with the other over some
well-defined period of time, and interoperation for their interactions during their
association. Note that association is distinct from connectivity: two components (e.g., an
email client on a laptop and an email server) may be currently disconnected while they
remain associated.
In a smart space, associations change because components take advantage of
opportunities to interact with local components. A simple example of such an
opportunity is for a device to use a local printer wherever the device happens to be.
Similarly, a device may want to offer services to clients in its local environment – such
as a ‘personal server’ [Want et al. 2002] that the user wears (for example, on a belt),
which supplies data about the user or belonging to the user to nearby devices. Of course,
certain static associations still make sense even in a volatile system; we have given the
example of a laptop computer that travels with its owner around the world but only ever
communicates with a fixed email server.


===== page 844 =====
826 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
To place this type of association into a bigger picture of services on the Internet,
Figure 19.2 shows examples of three types of spontaneous association (on the right), as
compared with pre-configured associations (on the left).
Preconfigured associations are service-driven: that is, clients having a long-term
need to use a specific service are preconfigured to be associated with it. The effort of
configuring the clients (including setting them up with the address of the required
service) is small compared to the long-term value of using that particular service.
On the righthand side of the figure are types of association that vary routinely,
driven by a human operator, by the need for specific data or by changing physical
circumstances. We can regard associations between a web browser and web services as
spontaneous and human-driven: the user makes dynamic and (from the system’s point
of view) unpredictable choices of link to click on and thus service instance to access.
The Web is a truly volatile system, and important to its success is the fact that changing
the associations typically involves negligible effort – the authors of web pages have
done the configuration work.
Peer-to-peer applications on the Internet, such as file-sharing programs, are also
volatile systems, but they are primarily data-driven. That data often originates from the
human (e.g., the name of the content to be sought), but it is the value of the data provided
to it that causes a peer to make associations with a peer it may never have associated
with before and whose address it has not formerly stored, via a data-based distributed
discovery algorithm.
The mobile and ubiquitous systems described in this chapter are distinguished by
exhibiting largely physically driven spontaneity of associations. The associations are
made and broken – sometimes by humans – according to the current physical
circumstances of the components, and in particular their proximity.
Lowered trust and privacy • As Chapter 11 explained, security in distributed systems is
ultimately based on trusted hardware and software – the trusted computing base. But
trust in volatile systems is problematic because of spontaneous interoperation: what
basis of trust can there be between components that are able to associate spontaneously?
Components moving between smart spaces may belong to disparate individuals or
organizations and have little or no prior knowledge of one another or of a trusted third
party.
Privacy is a major issue for users, who may distrust systems because of their
sensing capabilities. The presence of sensors in smart spaces means that it becomes
possible to track users electronically on a potentially massive scale not seen before. In
benefiting from context-aware services – as in the example of rooms that set the air
conditioning according to the preferences of users within them – users may enable
others to learn where they have been and what they were doing there. To make matters
worse, they may not always be aware that they are being sensed. Even if the user does
not disclose their identity, it may be possible for others to learn it and so find out what
a particular individual does – for example, by observing regular journeys between a
home and a place of work, and correlating those with the use of a credit card somewhere
in between.


===== page 845 =====
SECTION 19.2 ASSOCIATION 827
19.2 Association
As explained above, devices are liable to appear in and disappear from smart spaces
unpredictably. Despite this, volatile components need to interoperate – preferably
without user intervention. In other words, a device that appears in a smart space needs
to be able to bootstrap itself onto the local network to enable communication with other
devices, and associate appropriately in the smart space:
Network bootstrapping: Typically, communication takes place over a local network.
The device must first acquire an address on the local network (or register a
pre-existing address such as a mobile IP address); it may also acquire or register a
name.
Association: Components on the device either associate to services in the smart
space, provide services to components elsewhere in the smart space, or both.
Network bootstrapping • There are well-established solutions to the problem of
integrating a device into a network. Some of those solutions rely on servers accessible
within the smart space. For example, a DHCP server (see Section 3.4.3) can supply an
IP address and other networking and DNS parameters, which the device obtains by
issuing a query to a well-known broadcast address. Servers in the smart space may also
assign a unique domain name to the device; or if there is access to the open Internet the
device can use a dynamic DNS update service to register its new IP address against a
static domain name.
A more interesting case is to assign networking parameters in the absence of any
service infrastructure in the smart space or beyond it. That is desirable both to simplify
the smart space and to avoid dependencies on services that might fail. The IPv6 standard
includes a protocol for serverless address assignment. The Zero Configuration
Networking working group of the IETF [www.zeroconf.org] is developing standards for
serverless address assignment, domain name lookup, multicast address assignment and
discovery of services (see the next subsection). Apple’s Bonjour [www.apple.com I] is
a commercial implementation of much of that functionality. As with DHCP access, all
such methods utilize broadcasts or multicasts over the local network, using a
well-known address. Any device can listen on or transmit to such an address.
The association problem and the boundary principle • Once a device can communicate
in the smart space, it is faced with the association problem: how to associate
appropriately within it. Solutions to the association problem must address two main
aspects: scale and scope. First, there may be many devices within the smart space, and
perhaps orders of magnitude more software components on those devices. With which
of these, if any, should components on the appearing device interoperate, and how can
the choice be made efficiently?
Second, how can we constrain the scope when solving that problem, so as to
consider only components from the smart space – and all the components in the smart
space – rather than the potential trillions of components that lie beyond? Scoping is
partly but not only a type of scaling issue. A smart space typically has administrative and
territorial boundaries, which can make a large difference to users and administrators. For
example, if a device is to discover a service such as a printer in a hotel room, it must find


===== page 846 =====
828 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
a printer in its user’s room, and not the room next door. Equally, if there is an appropriate
printer in the user’s room, then a solution should include it as a candidate for association.
Theboundary principle states that smart spaces need to have system boundaries
that correspond accurately to meaningful spaces as they are normally defined
territorially and administratively [Kindberg and Fox 2001]. Those ‘system boundaries’
are system-defined criteria that scope but do not necessarily constrain association.
One attempt at a solution to the association problem is to use a discovery service,
described next. Discovery services are normally based on subnet multicast, which has
the disadvantage that the subnet’s reach may not coincide with the services that are
available in a smart space – i.e., that they break the boundary principle – as we shall
explain. Section 19.2.2 then describes some solutions that provide more accurately
scoped associations by relying on physical parameters and human input.
19.2.1 Discovery services
Clients find out about the services provided in a smart space using a discovery service.
A discovery service is a directory service (see Section 13.3) in which services in a smart
space are registered and looked up by their attributes, but one whose implementation
takes account of volatile system properties. First, the directory data required by a
particular client – i.e., the set of service attributes against which queries are to be run –
is determined at runtime. The directory data is dynamically determined as a function of
the client’s context – in this case, the particular smart space where the queries take place.
Second, there may be no infrastructure in the smart space to host a directory server.
Third, services registered in the directory may spontaneously disappear. Fourth, the
protocols used for accessing the directory need to be sensitive to the energy and
bandwidth they consume.
Both device discovery and service discovery services exist; Bluetooth includes
both. With device discovery, clients discover the names and addresses of co-present
devices. Typically, they then choose an individual device on the basis of out-of-band
information (such as selection by a human) and query it for the services it offers. On the
other hand, a service discovery service is used where clients are not concerned with
which device provides the service they need, but with the attributes of the service alone.
This description will concentrate on service discovery services, and unless stated
otherwise, that is what we mean by ‘discovery services’ henceforth.
A discovery service has an interface for automatically registering and
deregistering the services that are available for association, as well as an interface for
clients to look up services from those that are currently available, so as to go on to
associate with an appropriate service. Figure 19.3 gives a fictitious, simplified example
of those interfaces. First, there are calls to register a service’s availability with a given
address and attributes, and to manage its registration subsequently. Then there is a call
to look up the services that match a specification of required attributes. Zero or more
services may match the specification; each is returned with its address and attributes.
Note that a discovery service does not enable association by itself: service selection –
the choice of one service from the returned set – is also required. That may occur
programatically, or by listing the matching services from which the user may choose.
Developments in discovery services include the Jini discovery service (discussed
in the next section), the service location protocol [Guttman 1999], the Intentional


===== page 847 =====
SECTION 19.2 ASSOCIATION 829
Figure 19.3 The interface to a discovery service
Methods for Explanation
service registration and deregistration
lease := register(address, attributes) Register the service at the given address
with the given attributes; a lease is
returned
refresh(lease) Refresh the lease returned at registration
deregister(lease) Remove the service record registered
under the given lease
Method to look up a service
serviceSet := query(attributeSpecification) Return a set of registered services whose
attributes match the given specification
Naming System [Adjie-Winoto et al. 1999], the simple service discovery protocol
(which is at the heart of the Universal Plug and Play initiative [www.upnp.org]) and the
Secure Service Discovery Service [Czerwinski et al. 1999]. There are also link-layer
discovery services, such as that of Bluetooth.
The issues to be dealt with in the design of a discovery service are as follows:
Low-effort, appropriate association: Ideally, appropriate associations would be
made without any human effort. First, the set of services returned by the query
operation (Figure 19.3) would be appropriate – they would be precisely the services
existing in the smart space that matched the query. Second, service selection could
be made programatically or with minimal human input so as to meet the users’ needs.
Service description and query language: The overall goal is to match services to
clients’ requests for services. That presupposes a language for describing available
services, and one for expressing service requirements. The query and description
languages have to agree (or be translatable), and their expressiveness has to keep
pace with the development of new devices and services.
Smart-space-specific discovery: We require a mechanism for devices to access an
instance (or scope) of the discovery service that is appropriate to their current
physical circumstances – a mechanism that doesn’t rely on the device knowing the
particular name or address for that service a priori. In practice, discovery services are
related to a particular smart space only through the limited reach of multicast over a
subnet that intersects with it, as we shall explain.
Directory implementation: Logically, each instance of a discovery service involves
a queryable directory of available services. There are several ways of implementing
such a directory, with varying implications for network bandwidth, timeliness of
service discovery and energy consumption.
Service volatility: Any service in a volatile system has to efficiently and gracefully
handle the disappearance of a client. A discovery service has services as clients, and
it needs to handle service disappearance appropriately.


===== page 848 =====
830 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
As an example of association by discovery, consider an occasional or first-time visitor
to a host organization or a hotel, who needs to print a document from a laptop. The user
cannot reasonably be expected to have the names of particular local printers configured
in their laptop, or to guess their names (such as \\myrtle\titus, or \\lionel\frederick).
Rather than forcing the user to configure their machine while they visit, it would be
preferable for the laptop to use the query call of a discovery service to find the set of
available network printers that match the user’s needs. A particular printer can be
selected via interaction with the user or by consulting a record of the user’s preferences.
The required attributes of the printing service may, for example, specify whether
it is ‘laser’ or ‘inkjet’, whether or not it provides colour printing and its physical location
with respect to the user (for example, the room number).
Correspondingly, services provide their address and attributes to the discovery
service with the register call. For example, a printer (or a service that manages it) may
register its address and attributes with the discovery service as follows:
serviceAddress=http://www.hotelDuLac.com/services/printer57; resource-
Class=printer, type=laser, colour=yes, resolution=600dpi, location=room101
The usual way to bootstrap access to the local discovery service at runtime without
manual configuration is to use the reach of the local subnet; specifically, to multicast (or
broadcast) queries to a well-known IP multicast address over the local subnet. The
well-known IP multicast address is known a priori by all devices that need to access the
discovery service. Discovery services based only on network reach are sometimes
explicitly known as network discovery services.
Note that some networks, such as Bluetooth, use frequency hopping and cannot
communicate with all neighbouring devices simultaneously at a physical level.
Bluetooth achieves discovery using a counterpart to one ‘well-known address’: a
well-known frequency-hopping sequence. Discoverable devices cycle through the
frequencies more slowly than devices attempting to discover them, so that senders
(discoverers) and receivers eventually coincide in frequency and establish
communication.
There are several design choices to be made when implementing a discovery
service, which can have a considerable effect on the ways it can be used.
The first is whether the discovery service should be implemented by a directory
server, or be serverless. A directory server holds a set of descriptions of services that
have registered with it, and responds to clients issuing queries for services. Any
component (server or client) wanting to use the local directory service issues a multicast
request to locate it, and the directory server responds with its unicast address. The
component then communicates with it point-to-point, saving the interruption of
uninvolved devices that occurs with multicast communication. This works well in smart
spaces that provide infrastructure. The directory service can often be run from mains
power on a robust machine. But in simpler smart spaces such as basic meeting rooms,
there may be no facilities for a directory server. In principle it would be possible to elect
a server from whatever devices happened to be present (Section 15.3), but any such
server might disappear spontaneously. This would lead to complexity in the
implementation of clients of the discovery service, which would then have to adapt to a


===== page 849 =====
SECTION 19.2 ASSOCIATION 831
changing registry server. Moreover, the overheads due to re-election may be great in a
highly volatile system.
An alternative is serverless discovery, where the participating devices collaborate
to implement a distributed discovery service, in lieu of a directory server. As with any
distributed directory, there are two main implementation variants. In the push model,
services multicast (‘advertise’) their descriptions regularly. Clients listen for the
multicasts and run their queries against them, possibly caching descriptions in case they
are needed later. In the pull model, clients multicast their queries. Devices providing
services run the queries against their descriptions, and only respond with any
descriptions that match. Clients repeat their queries at intervals if there is no response.
Both push and pull models have implications for bandwidth and energy usage.
Every time a device issues a multicast message, bandwidth is consumed and all listening
devices expend energy receiving the message. In a pure push model, devices need to
advertise their services regularly so that appearing clients can discover them. But this is
wasteful of bandwidth and energy if there are no clients needing to discover a particular
service. And the time that an appearing client waits to hear about services has to be
traded off against the bandwidth and energy costs, which increase with the frequency of
advertisements.
In a pure pull model, a client can discover available services as soon as it appears,
and there are no wasted multicasts if there are no discovery needs in a given interval.
But the client may receive several responses when a single response would do. Also, no
advantage is taken, by default, of requests bearing the same query (for frequently
required services).
It is possible to design hybrid protocols that address the above shortcomings, and
Exercise 19.2 deals with this.
A service may invoke the deregister call (Figure 19.3) before it disappears, but
equally it may disappear spontaneously. Service volatility is handled in different ways
according to the architecture of the directory implementation. A directory server needs
to become aware as soon as possible after a registered service disappears, so that it does
not give out its description misleadingly. That is normally accomplished using a general
mechanism called leases. A lease is a temporary allocation of some resource by a server
to a client, which can only be renewed by a further request from the client before the
lease’s deadline has expired. If the client fails to renew it (for example, with the refresh
call of Figure 19.3), the server withdraws (and may reallocate) the resource. We
introduced leases as part of our discussion of Jini in Section 5.4.3; DHCP servers also
use leases when allocating IP addresses. A directory server maintains a service’s
registration only if the service periodically communicates with the directory server to
renew its lease on the entry. Here we see a similar trade-off of timeliness against
bandwidth and energy consumption – the shorter the lease period, the faster a service’s
disappearance will be noticed, but the more networking and energy resources will be
required. In a serverless architecture, no steps need be taken (except to clear stale entries
in devices that cache services), since a service that has disappeared will no longer
advertise itself and a client using a pull-based protocol can only discover present
services.


===== page 850 =====
832 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.4 Service discovery in Jini
admin
Printing
Client 1. ‘finance’ service
lookup service?
admin
Client
Lookup
service
Network
4. Use printing 2. Here I am: .....
service admin, finance
3. Request Lookup
Corporate Printing ‘printing’ service
infoservice service
finance
Jini • Jini [Waldo 1999, Arnold et al. 1999] is a system designed to be used for mobile
and ubiquitous systems. It is entirely Java-based – it assumes that Java virtual machines
run in all of the computers, allowing them to communicate with one another by means
of RMI or events (see Chapters 5 and 6) and to download code as necessary. Here we
describe Jini’s discovery system.
The discovery-related components in a Jini system are lookup services, Jini
services and Jini clients (see Figure 19.4). The lookup service implements what we have
termed a discovery service, although Jini uses the term ‘discovery’ only for discovering
thelookup service itself. The lookup service allows Jini services to register the services
they offer and Jini clients to request services that match their requirements. A Jini
service, such as a printing service, may be registered with one or more lookup services.
A Jini service provides, and the lookup services store, an object that provides the service,
as well as the attributes of the service. Jini clients query lookup services to find Jini
services that match their requirements; if a match is found, they download an object that
provides access to the service from the lookup service. The matching of service offers
to clients’ requests can be based on attributes or on Java typing, for example allowing a
client to request a colour printer for which it has the corresponding Java interface.
When a Jini client or service starts up, it sends a request to a well-known IP
multicast address. Any lookup service that receives the request and can respond to it
sends its address, enabling the requester to perform a remote invocation to look up or
register a service with it (registration is called joining in Jini). Lookup services also
announce their existence in datagrams sent to the same multicast address. Jini clients and
services may listen on the multicast address to learn about new lookup services.
There may be several instances of the lookup service reachable by multicast
communication from a given Jini client or service. Every such service instance is
configured with one or more group names, such as ‘admin’, ‘finance’ and ‘sales’, which


===== page 851 =====
SECTION 19.2 ASSOCIATION 833
act as scoping labels. Figure 19.4 shows a Jini client discovering and using a printing
service. The client requires a lookup service in the ‘finance’ group, so it multicasts a
request bearing that group name (message 1 in the figure). Only one lookup service is
bound to the ‘finance’ group (the service that is also bound to the ‘admin’ group), and
that service responds (2). The lookup service’s response includes its address, and the
client communicates directly with it by RMI to locate all services of type ‘printing’ (3).
Only one printing service has registered itself with that lookup service under the
‘finance’ group, and an object to access that particular service is returned. The client
then uses the printing service directly, using the returned object (4). The figure also
shows another printing service, one that is in the ‘admin’ group. There is also a corporate
information service that is not bound to any particular group (and that may be registered
with all lookup services).
Discussion of network discovery services • The discovery services based only on
network reach that we have just described – network discovery services – go some way
towards solving the association problem. Efficient directory implementations exist,
including ones that do not rely on infrastructure. In many cases, the number of clients
and services that can be reached over a subnet is manageable in terms of computation
and network costs, so scale is often not a problem. We have described measures to cope
with system volatility.
But network discovery services raise two difficulties when looked at from the
perspective of the boundary principle: the use of a subnet, and inadequacies in the way
services are described.
The subnet may be a poor approximation to a smart space. First, network
discovery may mistakenly include services that are not in the smart space. Consider a
hotel room, for example. Transmissions based on radio frequency (RF) signals such as
802.11 or Bluetooth will typically penetrate the walls to other guests’ rooms. Following
the Jini example, services could be logically partitioned by groups – one group per hotel
room. But that begs the question of how the user’s hotel room is to become a parameter
for the discovery service. Second, network discovery may mistakenly discount services
that are ‘in’ the smart space in the sense of being eligible for discovery there, but are
hosted beyond its subnet. The Cooltown case study illustrates how non-electronic
entities such as printed documents in a smart space may be associated with services
hosted outside the smart space (see Section 19.7.1).
Moreover, network discovery services do not always lead to appropriate
associations because the language used to describe services may be inadequate in two
respects. First, discovery may be brittle: even slight variations in the service-description
vocabulary used by disparate organizations could cause it to fail (for example, the hotel
room has a service called ‘Print’ whereas the guest’s laptop searches for ‘Printing’).
Variations in which human language is used for the vocabulary tend to exacerbate that
problem. Second, there may be lost opportunities for service access. For example,
suppose there is a ‘digital picture frame’ on the hotel room’s wall, which will display
holiday snaps in JPEG format. The guest’s camera has a wireless connection and
produces images in that format, but it has no description for the service – it has not been
upgraded with that relatively recent development. So the camera is incapable of taking
advantage of it.


===== page 852 =====
834 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
19.2.2 Physical association
The shortcomings of network discovery systems can be solved to some extent using
physical means, although the solutions often require a greater degree of human
involvement. The following techniques have been developed.
Human input to scope discovery • This case is where a human provides input to the
device to set the scope of discovery. A simple example of this would be to type in or
select the smart space’s identifier, such as the room number in the case of the hotel guest.
The device can then use the identifier as an extra service ‘group’ attribute (as in Jini).
Sensing and physically constrained channels to scope discovery • A less laborious
possibility is for the user to employ a sensor on their device. For example, the smart
space might have an identifier presented in identifier-encoding symbols called glyphs on
documents and surfaces in the space – e.g., displayed on the TV screen in the guest’s
hotel room. The guest uses a camera phone or other imaging device to decode such a
symbol, and the device uses the resultant identifier in the way we described for direct
human input. Another possibility, for use with outdoor smart spaces where satellite
navigation signals are available, is to use a sensor to obtain the position of the smart
space in latitude and longitude coordinates, and to send those coordinates to a
well-known wide area service that returns the address of the local discovery service.
However, given the inaccuracies in satellite navigation, that method may be less precise
in identifying the smart space if there are other spaces close by.
Another technique that avoids human input is to use a physically constrained
channel (see also Section 19.5.2) – a communication channel that, to some degree of
approximation, permeates only the physical span of the smart space. For example, in the
guest room the TV could be playing background music at low volume, with a digital
encoding of the room’s identifier superimposed as an inaudible perturbation of the
signal [Madhavapeddy et al. 2003], or there could be an infrared transmitter (a beacon)
in the room that propagates the identifier [Kindberg et al. 2002a]. Both of those channels
are significantly attenuated by the materials at the boundaries of the room (assuming the
doors and windows are closed).
Direct association • The final set of techniques we shall consider here is for the human
to use a physical mechanism to directly associate two devices, without using a discovery
service. Typically, this is where the devices involved offer just one or a small set of
human-selectable services. In each of the following techniques, the human enables the
device they are carrying to learn the network address (e.g., Bluetooth or IP address) of
a ‘target’ device.
Address-sensing: One device can be used to sense the network address of the target
device directly. Possibilities include reading a barcode on the device that encodes its
network address, or bringing one device very close to the other and using a short-range
wireless channel to read its address. Two examples of such short-range channels are
Near Field Communication [www.nfc-forum.org] – a standard for bidirectional radio
communication that spans several short ranges but has a variant for only up to about 3
centimetres – and very short range infrared transmissions.
Physical stimulus: A physical stimulus can be used to cause the target device to send its
address. An example here is to shine a digitally modulated laser beam (another


===== page 853 =====
SECTION 19.3 INTEROPERATION 835
physically constrained channel) onto the target device [Patel and Abowd 2003], thus
transmitting its address to the target, which responds with its address.
Temporal or physical correlation: Temporally or physically correlated stimuli can be used
to associate devices. The SWAP-CA specification [SWAP-CA 2002] for wireless
networking in a home environment introduced a protocol, sometimes referred to as the
two-button protocol, for humans to associate two wireless devices with each other. Each
device listens on a well-known multicast address. The users press buttons on their
respective devices more or less simultaneously, at which point the devices send their
network addresses to the multicast address. It is unlikely that another round of this
protocol will occur at the same time in the same subnet. The devices therefore associate
using any address that arrives within a small interval of the button press. There is an
interesting, if rarely practical, physical counterpart to this approach in which a user
holds two devices in the same hand and shakes them together [Holmquist et al. 2001].
Each device has an accelerometer for sensing its state of motion. The device records the
shaking pattern, computes an identifier from it, and multicasts that identifier together
with its unicast address to a well-known multicast address. Only the two devices
experiencing exactly that acceleration pattern – and within direct communication range
– will recognize each other’s identifier and hence learn each other’s address.
19.2.3 Summary and perspective
This section has described the association problem for components in volatile systems
and some attempts at solving that problem, ranging from network discovery to more
human-supervised techniques. Mobile and ubiquitous systems raise unique difficulties
because they are integrated with our everyday, messy physical world of spaces such as
domestic rooms and offices, making it hard to scope the solutions. Humans tend to have
strong territorial and administrative considerations in mind when they consider what is
in a particular smart space and what is outside it. The boundary principle says that
solutions to the association problem need to match the underlying physical spaces to a
degree that is acceptable to humans. We have seen that some degree of human
supervision is often entailed, because of the deficiencies of network discovery systems.
The Cooltown case study (Section 19.7) describes a particular model of human
involvement.
We have largely ignored scale as a factor in solutions to the association problem,
on the basis that the world is broken up into smart spaces that are, typically, of
manageable size. However, there is research into scalable discovery services – after all,
some applications might consider the entire planet to be a smart space. An example is
INS/Twine [Balazinska et al. 2002], which divides directory data between a collection
of peer resolvers.
19.3 Interoperation
We have described ways in which two or more components in a volatile system come to
be associated; now we turn to the question of how they interoperate. Components
associate on the basis of certain attributes or data that one or both of them possesses. But


===== page 854 =====
836 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
that leaves the questions of what protocol they use to communicate and, at a higher level,
what programming model is best suited for interaction between them. This section deals
with those questions.
Chapters 4, 5 and 6 describe models for interoperation including various forms of
interprocess communication, method invocation and procedure invocation. An implicit
assumption underlying some of those models is that the interoperating components are
designed to work together in a specific system or application, and that changes to the set
of interoperating components are either a long-term configuration issue or a runtime
error condition to be handled occasionally. But those assumptions are invalid in mobile
and ubiquitous systems. Fortunately, as we explain in this section, some of the methods
for interoperation from Chapters 4, 5 and 6, in addition to some new methods, are better
suited to these volatile systems.
Ideally, a component in a mobile or ubiquitous system could associate with
varying classes of services, and not just a varying set of instances of the same service
class. That is, it is best to avoid the ‘lost opportunity’ problem described in the previous
section where, for example, a digital camera is unable to send its images to a digital
picture frame because it cannot interoperate with the frame’s picture-consuming service.
Put another way, one goal for ubiquitous and mobile computing is that a
component should have a reasonable chance of interoperating with a functionally
compatible component, even if the latter is in a different type of smart space from the
one for which it was originally developed. That entails some global agreement between
software developers. Given the effort needed to reach agreement, it is best to minimize
what needs to be agreed upon.
The main difficulty that stands in the way of volatile interoperation is software
interface incompatibility. If, for example, a digital camera expects to invoke an
operation pushImage and there is no such operation in the digital picture frame’s
interface, then they cannot interoperate – at least, not directly.
There are two main approaches to this problem. The first is to allow interfaces to
be heterogeneous, but to adapt interfaces to one another. For example, if the digital
picture frame were to have an operation sendImage with the same parameters and
semantics as pushImage, then it would be straightforward to construct a component that
acted as a proxy for the digital picture frame, converting the camera’s pushImage
invocation into a sendImageinvocation for the picture frame.
However, it is very hard to realize this approach. Often the semantics of operations
may vary as well as the syntax, and overcoming semantic incompatibility is in general
difficult and error-prone. Then there is the scale of the problem: if there are N interfaces,
then potentially N2 adaptors have to be written, and more and more interfaces will be
created over time. Moreover, there is the question of how components are to acquire
suitable interface adaptors as they reassociate in a volatile system. Components (or the
devices that host them) cannot come preloaded with all possible N2 adaptors, so the
correct adaptor has to be determined and loaded at runtime. Despite all of these
difficulties, there is research into how to make interface adaptation practical. See, for
example, Ponnekanti and Fox [2004].
Another approach to interoperability is to constrain interfaces to be identical in
syntax across as wide a class of components as possible. That may sound unrealistic at
first, but in fact it has been widely and successfully practised for several decades. The
simplest example is pipes in UNIX. A pipe has only two operations, read and write, for


===== page 855 =====
SECTION 19.3 INTEROPERATION 837
the transport of data between components (processes) at its two ends. Over the years,
UNIX programmers have created many programs that can read data from a pipe and/or
write data to a pipe. Because of their standardized interfaces and generic text-processing
functionalities, the output of any of those programs can be fed into the input of another.
Users and programmers have found many useful ways of combining programs in that
way – programs that were written independently, without knowledge of the specific
functionality of the other programs.
A yet more successful example of a system that achieves a high degree of
interoperability through a fixed interface is the Web. The set of methods defined by the
HTTP specification (see Section 5.2) is small and fixed; typically, a web client uses only
the GET and POST operations to access a web server. The consequence of the fixed
interface is that a relatively stable piece of software – often the browser – is able to
interoperate with an evolving set of services. What changes between services is the type
and values of the content that is exchanged, and the server’s processing semantics. Every
interaction is still a GET or POST operation.
19.3.1 Data-oriented programming for volatile systems
We call systems that use an unvarying service interface, such as UNIX pipes and the
Web, data-oriented (or, equivalently, content-oriented). The term is chosen in
distinction to object-oriented. A component in a data-oriented system can be invoked by
any other component that knows the fixed interface. An object or collection of
procedures, on the other hand, has one of a widely varying set of possible interfaces and
can only be invoked by those components that know its particular interface. Distributing
and exploiting an indefinite number of specialized interface definitions is a much more
problematic proposition than publishing and using one interface specification, such as
the HTTP specification. That helps explain why the most widely used, heterogeneous
distributed system we have known is the Web, rather than a similarly scaled collection
of, say, CORBA objects.
But the flexibility of data-oriented systems is traded off against robustness. It does
not always make sense for two particular components to interoperate, and yet there is
little basis for programs to check for compatibility. In an object- or procedure-oriented
system, programs can at least check that their particular interface signatures match. But
a data-oriented component can enforce compatibility only by verifying the type of data
that is sent to it. It must either do that through standardized data-type descriptors
supplied as metadata (such as MIME types for web content), or by checking the data
values passed to it; for example, JPEG data begins with recognizable header
information.
We now examine some programming models that have been used for volatile
systems because of their data-oriented interoperability features. We begin with two
models for interoperation between indirectly associated components: event systems and
tuple spaces. We go on to describe two designs for interoperation between directly
associated devices: JetSend and Speakeasy.
Event systems • We introduced event systems [Bates et al. 1996] in Section 6.3. Event
systems provide instances of event services. Each system offers a fixed, generic
interface by which components called publishers publish structured data known as


===== page 856 =====
838 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
events and, correspondingly, components called subscribers receive events. Each event
service is associated with some physical or logical scope of event delivery. Subscribers
only receive (‘handle’) events that (1) are published at the same event service and (2)
match their registered specifications of which events interest them.
Events are a natural programming paradigm for announcing and handling the
changes experienced by components while they are in a volatile system or when they
move between volatile systems. Events can be constructed to specify new states of
affairs, such as changes in a device’s location. A recent example of a system that uses
events for ubiquitous computing is one.world [Grimm 2004], but events have been used
in ubiquitous systems from early in their development. In the Active Badge system
[Harter and Hopper 1994], applications could subscribe to location-change events that
occur when users move around. Location events also present the issue of detecting
patterns of events that occur together or in close succession, also known as composite
events. For example, consider the problem of detecting when two users are co-located,
when all that is known is when individual users enter or leave a particular location. A
location system does not detect such occurrences by itself: there is a need for rules that
specify, in terms of primitive events such as ‘Arrive(user, location, time)’ and
‘Leave(user, location, time)’, when composite events such as co-location occur.
Although the publishing, subscription and handling interface for events is a given
(with relatively minor variations between event systems), publishers and subscribers can
interoperate correctly only if they agree on the event service they use (there may be
many instances) and the types and attributes of events – that is, their syntax and
semantics. Thus event systems shift rather than solve the problem of ubiquitous
interoperability. For a given component to interoperate in a wide variety of smart spaces
would require standards for event types, and events would ideally be described in a
programming language–independent markup language such as XML or JSON.
On the other hand, event producers and consumers do not need to identify one
another. That can be an advantage in a volatile system, where keeping track of which
other components are present can be difficult. Two components come to communicate
by virtue of publishing and subscribing to matching events, and by agreement on the
scope of event delivery – in other words, they associate indirectly.
The scope of event delivery is itself an interesting topic in mobile and ubiquitous
systems. As with service discovery, the question arises of how the scope of an event
service is related to the physical extent of the smart space. This point is the topic of
Exercise 19.7.
Tuple spaces • Like event systems, tuple spaces are a mature programming paradigm
that has found application in volatile systems. The tuple space paradigm was introduced
in Section 6.5.2 as an indirect communication paradigm that supports the addition and
retrieval of structured data, called tuples, to and from a tuple space. Tuple space systems
allow application-specific tuples to be exchanged, and the basis for association and
interoperation is the components’ agreement about structures for tuples and values
contained within them.
As an example of the support they can offer ubiquitous computing, a digital
camera could discover the tuple space for the local smart space – a hotel room, say – and
place its images in the tuple space using a tuple such as:


===== page 857 =====
SECTION 19.3 INTEROPERATION 839
< 'The leaning tower', 'image/jpeg', <jpeg data>>
The designers of the camera software have a model only of a tuple space into
which images may be placed in a certain format, and no model of the particular forms
of processing to which those images will be subject.
Correspondingly, an image-consuming device such as a digital picture frame
could be programmed to discover its local tuple space and to attempt to retrieve from it
tuples with the form of the following template, in which ‘*’ represents a wildcard value:
<*, 'image/jpeg', *>
The camera’s tuple matches the template required by the picture frame – it has
three fields and its second field contains the required MIME type string. The picture
frame will thus retrieve the camera’s tuple and can display the image and associated title.
As another example, the user could have activated a printer to consume the image from
the tuple space and print it.
Several programming systems based on tuple spaces have been developed
specifically for mobile and ubiquitous systems, as discussed below.
The event heap: Despite its name, the event heap [Johanson and Fox 2004] is a
tuple-based programming system developed for a type of smart space known as the
‘iRoom’, which contains multiple large displays and other infrastructure devices. For
each iRoom there is a corresponding event heap, which components in the iRoom –
including those on mobile devices brought into the room – can discover or can be
configured to use. Components interoperate by exchanging tuples via the event heap,
and it provides a level of indirection that facilitates dynamic association between the
devices. An example is where a remote control device kept in the iRoom can be
associated dynamically to different displays, and a video can be presented on any of
these displays. When a user presses the ‘pause’ button on the remote control, the control
places a ‘pause’ tuple in the event heap. Whatever device is displaying the video is
programmed to look for and retrieve ‘pause’ tuples, and thus respond. The remote
control could be made to work with an audio output device in exactly the same way,
without reprogramming it.
LIME: The LIME system (Linda in a Mobile Environment) [Murphy et al. 2001] was
developed as a programming model for mobile systems. In LIME, participating devices
host tuple spaces and there is no reliance on infrastructure. Each device hosts its own
tuple space. LIME shares the individual tuple spaces when their host devices become
associated, forming the union of the sets of tuples in the aggregate of shared spaces. This
could be used for service discovery, for example. A component that requires a service
could be programmed to attempt to retrieve a tuple describing an instance of the service
it requires; a device implementing a corresponding service would be programmed to
place a descriptive tuple in its local tuple space. When the two became connected, LIME
would establish the match and the would-be client would obtain the service’s details.
While the LIME model is simple to state, it is non-trivial to implement suitable
consistency semantics in the face of arbitrary connections and disconnections. LIME’s
implementors made arguably unrealistic assumptions to simplify their design, including
that multicast connectivity holds uniformly between the devices whose tuple spaces are


===== page 858 =====
840 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
aggregated and that connections and disconnections to and from an aggregated set are
serialized and orderly.
TOTA: The TOTA (Tuples On The Air) Project [Mamei and Zambonelli 2009] provides
a rather interesting twist to the standard implementation of tuple spaces. In this
approach, tuples are injected into the network by placing them on a local node and then
allowing the tuples to be cloned and propagated throughout the network in a manner
similar to gossip protocols (see Section 18.4.1). The end result is a tuple field
representing a spatial dissemination of a given tuple. A process can then read the tuple
in the usual manner using associative matching. To support this style of programming,
a tuple T is defined as T=(C,P,M), where C is the content of the tuple, P is the
propagation rule for that tuple and M is a maintenance rule that defines how the tuple
should react to events from the environment or to the passing of time. For example,
Mamei and Zambonelli [2009] describe an art museum application where different
rooms in the museum have fixed wireless devices and visitors have wireless-enabled
smart phones, which together form an ad hoc network. The smart phone of a visitor
interested in a particular piece of art places a query tuple into the system whose content
is a description of the piece of art together with a distance field. The propagation rule is
to propagate the tuple to all nodes in the vicinity, increasing the distance by one each
time; the maintenance rule is to delete the tuple after a time-to-live period. Once this
tuple arrives at a particular room where the piece of art resides, an answer tuple is
injected into the system containing a description of the artwork, the location of the
artwork and a distance field; the propagation rule this time is to follow the path
backwards to the visitor, increasing the distance each time, and the maintenance rule
again is to implement a time-to-live policy. The end result is a highly flexible
programming model that is particularly useful for operation in spatially connected ad
hoc environments and in ubiquitous computing more generally.
L2imbo: L2imbo is a replicated tuple space implementation designed to operate in a
mobile environment [Davies et al. 1998]. Whereas the most common motivation for
replication is to achieve high availability and fault tolerance, L2imbo exploits
replication to deal with device disconnection. L2imbo adopts a fully replicated approach
where every node maintains a replica. The goal is then to ensure the consistency of this
set of replicas. To this end, L2imbo adopts the approach of reliable multicast over IP
multicast, as discussed in Section 15.4.2, specifically using the scalable reliable
multicast approach featured in that section [Floyd et al. 1997]. L2imbo supports the
creation of multiple tuple spaces, and each tuple space maps uniquely onto an IP
multicast address. The implementations of read and write are relatively straightforward,
with read often being satisfied locally and write mapping onto a (reliable) multicast
operation. The implementation of take is more complex given the requirement for global
withdrawal. The approach builds on a concept of ownership in L2imbo, with only the
owner being able to remove the tuple. The owner is normally the creator of the tuple, but
ownership can subsequently be transferred to other processes.
Comparing event systems and tuple spaces • If we identify ‘event’ with ‘tuple’ and
‘specification of interest’ with ‘tuple-matching template’, there is a correspondence
between the two models of interoperation. Both provide a level of indirection that is
useful for volatile systems, since the identities of the components that produce and
consume events or tuples are hidden from one another by default. The set of components


===== page 859 =====
SECTION 19.3 INTEROPERATION 841
can thus change transparently. However, there are important differences. First, the event
model is exclusively asynchronous, whereas tuple space systems supply a synchronous
operation to retrieve a matching tuple. It can be easier to program with synchronous
operations. On the other hand, it is a bad idea to expect that a particular component (for
example, an image-producing device that has been dynamically encountered) will
eventually supply a matching tuple, since disconnection may occur at any time.
The second important difference is the lifetime of events and tuples. By default,
an event does not outlast its propagation between publishers and subscribers. A tuple in
a tuple space, however, may outlast the component that placed it there – and any
component that reads (as opposed to destructively consumes) it. That persistence can be
an advantage; for example, the batteries in a user’s camera might fail after they have
uploaded pictures to a hotel room’s tuple space but before they have assigned them to
another device. At the same time, persistence can be a disadvantage: what if an
uncontrollable set of devices places tuples in a space, but they are never consumed
because the components expected to consume them have become disconnected? The set
of tuples in such a space might grow uncontrollably. Without global knowledge of a
volatile set of components, it would be impossible to determine which tuples were
garbage.
The designers of the event heap recognized the persistence problem for iRooms.
They chose to allow tuples to expire (that is, to be garbage-collected) after being in an
event heap for a specified time, which is usually chosen to correspond with a human
interaction timespan. That prevents, for example, an unconsumed pause event from a
remote control to cause a nuisance when a user tries to play a video the next day.
Direct device interoperation • The previous programming models were for interopera-
tion between indirectly associated components. JetSend and Speakeasy are systems de-
signed for interoperation between two devices that a human has brought into direct
association.
JetSend: The JetSend protocol [Williams 1998] was designed for interaction between
appliances such as cameras, printers, scanners and TVs. JetSend was explicitly designed
to be data-oriented, so that no appliance had to be loaded with specialized drivers
according to the specific devices with which it would interact. For example, a JetSend
camera can send an image to a JetSend image-consuming device such as a printer or TV,
regardless of the specific functionality of the consumer. The central generic operation
between connected JetSend devices is to synchronize the state that one presents to the
other. That means transferring the state, in a format negotiated by the devices. For
example, an image-producing device such as a scanner could synchronize with an
image-consuming device such as a digital picture frame by consuming an image from
the producer in JPEG format, chosen from several image formats that the producer could
provide. The same scanner might equally synchronize with a TV, perhaps using a
different image format.
JetSend’s designers recognized that their synchronization operation benefited
only simple interoperation – essentially, data transfer – between heterogeneous devices.
That begs the question of how to achieve more complex interactions between specific
devices. For example, how should a choice be made between monochrome and colour
when transferring an image to be printed? By assumption, the source device has no
driver for a specific printer. And it is not possible for that device to be programmed a


===== page 860 =====
842 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
priori with the semantics of any arbitrary device (including devices yet to be invented)
with which it might connect. The JetSend answer to that problem was to rely on a human
to select the specific functions of the target device (say, a printer), using a user interface
specified by the target device but rendered on their source device (say, a camera). That
is how interoperation happens routinely on the Web, as users interact with highly
heterogeneous services via their browser: each service they interact with sends its
interface in the form of markup script to the browser, which renders it to the user as a
generic set of widgets, without knowledge of the service’s specific semantics. Web
services (see Chapter 9) are an attempt to replace the human by programs even for
complex interactions.
Speakeasy: The Speakeasy project [Edwards et al. 2002] later applied the same design
principles as JetSend to device-device interoperation, but with one difference: they
utilize mobile code. There are two motivations for using mobile code. The first is that a
device such as a printer can send any user interface to a user of another device such as a
smart phone. A mobile code implementation of a user interface can perform local
processing such as input validation, and it can provide interaction modes not available
in user interfaces that have to be specified in a markup language. However, against this
advantage has to be set the implications for security of executing mobile code, which
requires sophisticated protection mechanisms against Trojan horses, and the resource
implications of running mobile code on a virtual machine as opposed to processing
much more restricted markup script.
The second motivation for mobile code in device interoperation is optimization of
data transfer. While Speakeasy’s mobile code has to work within the constraints of the
host device’s API, it may perform arbitrary interactions with the remote device that sent
it. Thus, for example, the mobile code can implement an optimized protocol for
transferring content that is specific to the type of content – e.g., video could be
compressed on the fly before transmission. By contrast, JetSend can use only predefined
content transfer protocols.
19.3.2 Indirect associations and soft state
When a service (such as an infrastructure service) is resourced well enough to be highly
available, then it makes sense for components to associate with it explicitly – that is, to
learn its address. When components later use that address to interoperate with the
service – say, 10 minutes after association – then they can reasonably expect it to be
reachable still and to respond. However, in general, system volatility makes it
undesirable to rely on a service provided by a particular component since that
component could leave or fail at any time. One lesson from that distinction is that it is
useful for programmers to be told which services are highly available, and which are
volatile. In addition, to cope with volatility, they need to be provided with programming
techniques that do not involve reliance on a specific component.
Some of the above examples of data-oriented programming systems involved
indirect, anonymous associations. Specifically, components that interoperate via an
event system or tuple space do not necessarily know one another’s names or addresses.
As long as the event service or the tuple space persists, the individual components can
come and go and be replaced. Care is needed to maintain the correct operation of the


===== page 861 =====
SECTION 19.3 INTEROPERATION 843
system overall, but at least the programmers of the components do not have to manage
individual associations with routinely disappearing peers.
An example of a client-server system that uses indirect association is the
Intentional Name System (INS) [Adjie-Winoto et al. 1999]. Components issue requests
that specify the attributes of the required service, the operation to be invoked and its
parameters. The components do not need to specify the name or address of an instance
of the required service, because the INS automatically routes the operation and
parameters to an appropriate – e.g. local – service instance that matches the required
attributes. Since successive operations directed to the same attribute specification could
be handled by different server components, the INS assumes that those servers either are
stateless or replicate their state using one of the techniques described in Chapter 18.
That leads to a general question: how are programmers supposed to manage state
in a volatile system? The replication techniques from Chapter 18 assume a redundancy
of resources, which may not be available in a volatile system –at least, not continuously.
The replication techniques also entail extra communication that may not be practical
because of the associated energy consumption and performance degradation.
Lamport’s ‘Paxos’ or ‘Part-time Parliament’ algorithm [1998] provides a way of
reaching distributed agreement despite volatility – the participating processes are
assumed to disappear and reappear regularly and independently. However, the algorithm
depends on each process having access to its own persistent store.
By contrast, some implementations use soft state to provide more relaxed but still
useful consistency guarantees, even in the absence of continuously available persistent
storage. Clark [1988] introduced the notion of soft state as a way of managing the
configuration of Internet routers despite failures. The collection of routers is a volatile
system that has to continue to function even though no routers in the system can be
assumed always to be available. The definition of soft state has been the subject of
debate [Raman and McCanne 1999], but broadly speaking it is data that provides a hint
(that is, it might be stale and should not be relied upon for its strict currency), and, most
importantly, the sources of soft state automatically update it. Some discovery systems
(see Section 19.2) exemplify the use of soft state to manage the collection of service
registration entries. The entries are only hints – there may be an entry for a service that
has disappeared – and the entries are automatically updated by multicasts from services,
to add new entries and keep existing entries current.
19.3.3 Summary and perspective
This section has described models of interoperation between components in volatile
systems. If each smart space was to develop its own programming interface, then the
benefits of mobility would be limited. If a component did not originate in a given smart
space but moved there, the only way it could interoperate with services within the smart
space would be via a way of adapting its interface spontaneously to that of its new
surroundings. Achieving that would require very sophisticated runtime support, which
is as yet unrealized outside a few examples in the laboratory.
A different approach, described through several examples above, is data-oriented
programming. On the one hand, the Web has shown the extensibility and mass
applicability of that paradigm. On the other hand, there is no ‘silver bullet’ that will
solve all of the problems of interoperation for volatile systems. Data-oriented systems


===== page 862 =====
844 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
trade agreement on the set of functions in an interface against agreement on the types of
data that are passed as arguments to those functions. While XML (see Section 4.3.3) is
sometimes touted as a way of facilitating data interoperation by enabling data to be
‘self-describing’, in fact it merely provides a framework for expressing structure and
vocabulary. In itself, XML has nothing to contribute to what is a semantic problem.
Some authors consider the ‘Semantic Web’ [www.w3.org XX] to be the way to achieve
interoperability between machines, without human interpretation.
19.4 Sensing and context awareness
The foregoing sections have concentrated on aspects of the volatility of mobile and
ubiquitous systems. This section will concentrate on the other chief characterization of
those systems: that of being integrated with the physical world. Specifically, it will
consider architectures for processing data collected from sensors, and context-aware
systems that can respond to their (sensed) physical circumstances. The sensing of
location, an important physical parameter, will be examined in more detail.
Since users and the devices we are considering are often mobile, and since the
physical world presents different opportunities for rich interactions across locations and
times, their physical circumstances are often relevant as a determinant of system
behaviour. The context-aware braking system of a car could adjust its behaviour
according to whether the road conditions are icy. A personal device could automatically
harness resources detected in its environment, such as a large display. The Active Badge
system provides a historical example: the location of a user – that is, the location of the
badge they wore – was used to identify which phone their calls should be routed to
[Want et al. 1992], in the days before mobile phones.
Thecontext of an entity (person, place or thing, whether electronic or otherwise)
is an aspect of its physical circumstances of relevance to system behaviour. The context
includes relatively simple values such as the location, time and temperature, the identity
of an associated user – e.g., one operating a device – or other users nearby; and the
presence and state of an object such as another device, e.g., a display. Context can be
codified and acted upon through rules, such as ‘If the user is Fred and he is in an IQ Labs
meeting room, and if there is a display within 1 m, then show information from the
device on the display – unless a non-IQ Labs employee is also present’. Context is also
taken to include more complex attributes such as the user’s activity. For example, a
context-aware phone that has to decide whether to ring requires answers to questions
such as ‘Is the user in a cinema watching a film or are they chatting to their friends before
the screening?’
19.4.1 Sensors
The determination of a contextual value begins with sensors, which are combinations of
hardware and/or software used to measure contextual values. Some examples are:
Location, velocity and orientation sensors: Satellite navigation (GPS) units for
providing global coordinates and velocities; accelerometers to detect movement;
magnetometers and gyroscopes to provide orientation data.


===== page 863 =====
SECTION 19.4 SENSING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 845
Ambient condition sensors: Thermometers; sensors that measure light intensity; mi-
crophones for sound intensity.
Presence sensors: Sensors that measure physical load, e.g. to detect the presence of
a person sitting on a chair or walking across a floor; devices that read electronic
identifiers on tags brought near to them, such as RFID (Radio Frequency
IDentification, a subset of NFC) readers [Want 2004], or infrared readers such as
those used to sense active badges; software used to detect key presses on a computer.
The above categories are meant only as examples of sensors used for particular
purposes. A given sensor may be put to various purposes. For example, the presence of
humans could be detected using microphones in a meeting room and an object’s location
could be determined by detecting the presence of its active badge in a known place.
An important aspect of a sensor is its error model. All sensors produce values with
some degree of error. Some sensors, e.g. thermometers, can be manufactured so that the
errors fall within the bounds of a fairly well known tolerance, and with a known (e.g.,
Gaussian) distribution. Others, such as satellite navigation units, have complicated error
modes that depend on their current circumstances. First, they may fail to produce a value
at all in certain circumstances. Satellite navigation units are dependent on the set of
satellites currently visible. They typically do not work at all inside buildings, whose
walls attenuate the satellite signals too much for the units to operate. Second, the
calculation of the unit’s location depends on dynamic factors including satellite
positions, the existence of nearby occlusions and ionospheric conditions. Even outside
buildings, a unit will typically provide different values at different times for the same
location, with only a best-effort estimate of the current accuracy. Near to buildings or
other tall objects that occlude or reflect radio signals, just enough satellites may be
visible to produce a reading, but the accuracy may be low and the reading may even be
spurious.
A useful way to state a sensor’s error behaviour is to quote an accuracy that it
reaches for a specified proportion of measurements, for example: ‘Within the given area,
the satellite navigation unit was found to be accurate to within 10 m for 90% of
measurements’. Another approach is to state a confidence value for a particular
measurement –a number (usually between 0 and 1) chosen according to uncertainties
encountered in deriving the measurement.
19.4.2 Sensing architectures
Salber et al. [1999] identify four functional challenges to be overcome in designing
context-aware systems:
Integration of idiosyncratic sensors: Some of the sensors needed for context-aware
computing are unusual in their construction and programming interfaces. Specialized
knowledge may be needed to correctly deploy them in the physical scenario of
interest (e.g., where should accelerometers be attached to measure the user’s arm
gestures?), and there may be system issues such as the availability of drivers for
standard operating systems.
Abstracting from sensor data: Applications require abstractions of contextual
attributes, to avoid concern with the peculiarities of individual sensors. The problem


===== page 864 =====
846 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
is that even sensors that can be put to similar purposes typically provide different raw
data. For example, a given location may either be sensed as a latitude/longitude pair
by a satellite navigation sensor, or sensed as the string ‘Joe’s Café’ read from a
nearby infrared source. Either, both or neither might be what the application needs to
function. There needs to be agreement on the meaning of contextual attributes, and
software to infer those attributes from raw sensor values.
Sensor outputs may need to be combined: Reliably sensing a phenomenon may
entail combining values from several error-prone sources. For example, detecting the
presence of a person might require a microphone (to detect voice – but nearby sounds
might interfere), floor pressure sensors (to detect human movement – but different
users’ patterns are hard to distinguish) and video (to detect human forms – but facial
features are hard to distinguish). Combining sensor sources to reduce errors is known
assensor fusion. Equally, an application may require output from sensors of different
types in order to gather several contextual attributes that it needs to operate. For
example, a context-aware smart phone that decides whether to present data on a
nearby display requires data from different sensor sources, including ones to detect
who and which devices are present, and one or more to sense the location.
Context is dynamic: A context-aware application typically needs to respond to
changes in context, and not simply to read a snapshot of it. For example, the
context-aware smart phone needs to blank its data from the room’s display if a non-
employee enters, or if Fred (the device’s owner) leaves the room.
Researchers have devised various software architectures to support context-aware
applications while dealing with some or all of the above issues. We give examples of
architectures for situations in which the set of available sensors is more or less known
and static, and architectures for determining contextual attributes from volatile
collections of sensors (where non-functional requirements such as energy-saving also
become prominent).
Sensing in the infrastructure • Active badge sensors were originally deployed in the
laboratory of Olivetti Research in Cambridge, England, at known, fixed locations in the
building. One of the original context-aware applications was as an aid for a telephone
receptionist. If someone called for, say, Roy Want, the receptionist would look for Roy’s
room location on the screen, so they could put the call through to an appropriate
extension. The system determined Roy’s location from information about where the
badge he wore was last sensed, and displayed that information to the receptionist.
Systems for processing active badge data and other contextual data were refined at
Olivetti Research Labs and at Xerox PARC. Harter and Hopper [1994] describe an
entire system for processing location events. Schilit et al. [1994] also describe a system
that can process active badge sensing events, through what they call context-triggered
actions. For example, the specification:
Coffee Kitchen arriving 'play -v 50 /sounds/rooster.au'
would cause a sound to be played whenever a badge was sensed arriving at the
sensor mounted by the coffee machine in the kitchen.


===== page 865 =====
SECTION 19.4 SENSING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 847
Figure 19.5 TheIdentityPresence widget class of the Context Toolkit
Attributes (accessible by polling) Explanation
Location Location the widget is monitoring
Identity ID of the last user sensed
Timestamp Time of the last arrival
Callbacks
PersonArrives(location, identity, timestamp) Triggered when a user arrives
PersonLeaves(location, identity, timestamp) Triggered when a user leaves
The Context Toolkit [Salber et al. 1999] is an example of a system architecture for
more general context-aware applications thanthose based around a specific technology
such as active badges. It was the designers of the Context Toolkit who stated the four
challenges for context-aware systems listed above. Their architecture follows the model
of how graphical user interfaces are constructed from reusable widget libraries, which
hide most of the concerns of dealing with the underlying hardware – and much of the
interaction management – from the application developer. The Context Tzoolkit defines
context widgets. Those reusable software components present an abstraction of some
type of context attribute while hiding the complexity of the actual sensors used. For
example, Figure 19.5 shows the interface to an IdentityPresence widget. It provides
contextual attributes to software polling the widget, and it raises callbacks when the
contextual information changes (i.e., a user arrives or leaves). As indicated above, the
presence information could be derived from any of several combinations of sensors in a
given implementation; the abstraction enables the application writer to ignore those
details.
Widgets are constructed from distributed components. Generators acquire raw
data from sensors such as floor pressure sensors, and provide that data to widgets.
Widgets use the services of interpreters, which abstract contextual attributes from the
generator’s low-level data, deriving higher-level values such as the identity of a person
who is present from their distinctive footsteps. Finally, widgets called servers provide
further levels of abstraction by collecting, storing and interpreting contextual attributes
from other widgets. For example, a PersonFinder widget for a building could be
constructed from the IdentityPresence widgets for each room in the building (Figure
19.6), which in turn could be implemented using footstep interpretation from floor
pressure readings or face recognition from video capture. The PersonFinder widget
encapsulates the complexity of a building for the application writer.
Looked at in relation to the four challenges that the Context Toolkit’s designers
stated, their architecture does accommodate a variety of sensor types; it is geared
towards the production of abstract contextual attributes from raw sensor data; and,
through polling or callbacks, a context-aware application can learn about changes in its
context. However, the toolkit goes only a limited way towards a practical solution. It
does not of itself help users and programmers to integrate idiosyncratic sensors; neither


===== page 866 =====
848 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.6 APersonFinder widget constructed using IdentityPresence widgets
PersonFinder
Widgets
Room A IdentityPresence IdentityPresence Room B
Footstep recognition
(interpreter) Face recognition
Floor pressure (generators) (interpreter)
Video (generator)
does it solve any of the hard problems inherent in the processes of interpretation and
combination for a specific case.
Wireless sensor networks • We have discussed architectures for applications in which
the set of sensors is relatively stable – for example, where the sensors are installed in
rooms in a building, often with external power and wired network connections. We now
turn to cases where the set of sensors forms a volatile system. A wireless sensor network
consists of a (typically large) number of small, low-cost devices or nodes, each with
facilities for sensing, computing and wireless communication [Culler et al. 2004]. It is
a special case of an ad hoc network: the nodes are physically arranged more or less
randomly, but they can communicate over multiple wireless hops between their peers.
An important design goal for these networks is to function without any global control;
each node bootstraps itself by discovering its wireless neighbours and communicating
via them alone. Section 3.5.2 describes ad hoc configurations of 802.11 networks, but
lower-power technologies such as ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4) are more relevant here.
One reason why nodes communicate not in a single hop to all other nodes but only
with nodes located nearby is that wireless communication is costly in terms of power
consumption, which increases as the square of radio range. The other main reason for
restricting the range of individual radios is to reduce network contention.
Wireless sensor networks are designed to be added to an existing natural or built
environment and to function independently of it – i.e., without reliance on infrastructure.
Given their limited radio and sensing range, the nodes are installed at a sufficient density
to make it probable both that multihop communication will be possible between any pair
of nodes, and that significant phenomena can be sensed.
For example, consider devices placed throughout a forest whose job is to monitor
for fires and perhaps other environmental conditions, such as the presence of animals.
These nodes are very much the devices introduced in Section 19.1.1. They each have
sensors attached, e.g. for temperature, sound and light; they run on batteries; and they
communicate with other devices in a peer-to-peer fashion via short-range radio
communication. The volatility stems from the fact that these devices can fail due to
battery exhaustion or accidents such as fires; and their connectivity may change due to


===== page 867 =====
SECTION 19.4 SENSING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 849
node failures (nodes relay packets between other nodes) or environmental conditions
affecting radio propagation.
Another example is where the nodes are attached to vehicles to monitor traffic and
road conditions. A node that has observed a poor condition can relay information about
it via nodes on passing vehicles. With sufficient overall connectivity, this system can
warn other nearby drivers headed in the direction of the problem. Here the volatility
arises principally because of the nodes’ movement, which rapidly changes each node’s
state of connectivity with other nodes. This is an example of a mobile ad hoc network.
In general, wireless sensor networks are dedicated to an application-specific
purpose that amounts to detecting certain alarms – conditions of interest such as fires or
poor road conditions. At least one more powerful device, a root node, is usually included
in the network, for longer-range communication with a conventional system that reacts
to the alarms – for example, by calling the emergency services when there is a fire.
One approach to software architectures for sensor networks is to treat them
similarly to conventional networks by separating the network layer from higher layers.
In particular, it is possible to adapt existing routing algorithms to the graph of nodes as
they dynamically discover themselves to be connected by their direct radio links, with
each node able to act as a router for communications from other nodes. Adaptive
routing, which attempts to accommodate the volatility of the network, has been the
subject of much study, and Milanovic et al. [2004] provide an overview of some
techniques.
However, limiting concern to the network layer raises issues. First, adaptive
routing algorithms are not necessarily tuned to low energy (and bandwidth)
consumption. Second, volatility undermines some of the assumptions in traditional
layers above the network layer. An alternative, first-principles approach to software
architectures for wireless sensor networks is driven by two main requirements: energy
conservation and continuous operation despite volatility. Those two factors lead to three
main architectural features: in-network processing, disruption-tolerant networking and
data-oriented programming models.
In-network processing: Not only is wireless communication absolutely costly in energy
consumption, but it is relatively expensive compared to processing. Pottie and Kaiser
[2000] calculated energy consumption and found that a general-purpose processor could
execute 3 million instructions for the same amount of energy (3J) used to transmit 1 kbit
of data 100 m by radio. So, in general, processing is preferable to communication: it is
better to spend some processor cycles determining whether communication is (yet)
necessary, than to blindly transmit sensed data. Indeed, that is why the nodes in sensor
networks have a processing capability – otherwise, they could have consisted simply of
sensing modules and communication modules that would send sensed values to root
nodes for processing.
The phrase in-network processing refers to processing within the sensor network;
that is, on the network nodes. The nodes in a sensor network perform tasks such as
aggregating or averaging values from nearby nodes so as to examine values for an area
rather than a single sensor filtering out data of no interest or repeated data, examining
data to detect alarms and switching sensors on or off according to the values being
sensed. For example, if low-power light sensors indicate the possible presence of
animals (due to the casting of shadows), then the nodes near to where the shadows were


===== page 868 =====
850 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
cast could switch on their higher-power sensors, such as microphones, to try to detect
animal sounds. That scheme enables the microphones to be turned off otherwise, to
conserve energy.
Disruption-tolerant networking: The end-to-end argument (Section 2.3.3) has been an
important architectural principle for distributed systems. However, in volatile systems
such as sensor networks, it may be that no end-to-end path exists continuously for long
enough to achieve an operation such as the movement of data in bulk across a system.
The terms disruption tolerant networking and delay tolerant networking are used for
protocols to achieve higher-layer transfers across volatile (and typically heterogeneous)
networks [www.dtnrg.org]. The techniques are intended not only for sensor networks
but also other volatile networks, such as interplanetary communication systems needed
for space research [www.ipnsig.org]. Rather than relying on continuous connectivity
between two fixed endpoints, communication becomes opportunistic: data are
transferred as and when they can be, and nodes take on successive responsibilities to
move data in a store-and-forward fashion until an end-to-end goal such as bulk transport
has been attained. The unit of transfer between nodes is known as a bundle [Fall 2003],
which contains a source’s application data and data describing how to manage and
process it both at the endpoint and at intermediate nodes. For example, a bundle might
be transferred with hop-by-hop reliable transports; once a bundle has been handed over,
the recipient node assumes responsibility for its subsequent delivery over the next hop,
and so on. This procedure does not rely on any continuous route; also, resource-poor
nodes are relieved from storing the data as soon as they have transferred it to the next
hop. To guard against failure, data can be forwarded redundantly to several
neighbouring nodes.
Data-oriented programming models: Turning to interoperation in the application layers,
data-oriented techniques including directed diffusion and distributed query processing,
described shortly, have been developed for applications of sensor networks. These
techniques recognize the need for in-network processing by incorporating methods for
distributing the processing across the nodes. Moreover, the techniques recognize the
volatility of sensor networks by eliminating node identities – and any other names for
components such as processes or objects associated with a node. As we discussed in
Section 19.3.2, any program that relies on the continuous existence of a node or a
component will not work robustly in a volatile system, since there is a significant chance
that communication with that node or component will become impossible.
In directed diffusion [Heidemann et al. 2001], the programmer specifies interests,
which are declarations of tasks injected into the system at certain nodes called sinks. For
example, a node might express an interest in the presence of animals. Each interest
contains attribute-value pairs, which are the ‘names’ of the nodes that will perform the
task. Thus nodes are referred to not through their identity but through characteristics
required to perform the required task, such as values in a certain range that are being
sensed there.
The runtime system propagates interests from a sink through the network in a
process called diffusion (Figure 19.7a). The sink forwards the interest to neighbouring
nodes. Any node that receives an interest stores a record of it, along with information
needed to pass data back to the sink node, before propagating it further in the search for
nodes that match the interest. A source node is one that matches an interest by virtue of


===== page 869 =====
SECTION 19.4 SENSING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 851
Figure 19.7 Directed diffusion
sink
sink sink
source
source source
source
source source
(a) Interest propagation (b) Gradients set up (c) Data delivery
characteristics that match the attribute-value pairs specified in the interest – for example,
it may be equipped with appropriate sensors. There may be several source nodes for a
given interest (just as there may be several sinks at which the interest was injected).
When the runtime system finds a matching source node, it passes the interest to the
application, which turns on its sensors as required and generates the data needed by the
sink node. The runtime system ferries that data back to the sink along a reverse path
made up of nodes that forwarded the interest from the sink.
Since, in general, no node has a priori knowledge of which other node can act as
a source, directed diffusion may involve considerable redundant communication. At
worst, the entire network may be flooded with an interest. However, sometimes the
interest concerns only a certain physical region, such as a specific area in a forest. If
sensor nodes know their locations, then the interest need be propagated only to the target
area. In principle, nodes could be equipped with satellite navigation receivers for that
purpose, although natural coverage such as dense trees may obstruct readings.
The flow of data back from source to sink is controlled by gradients, which are
(direction, value) pairs between nodes that are set up for each particular interest as it
diffuses through the network (Figure 19.7b). The direction is that in which the data is to
flow, and the value is application-specific but can be used to control the rate of flow. For
example, the sink might require data about animal sightings only a certain number of
times per hour. There may be several paths from a given source to a given sink. The
system can apply various strategies for choosing among them, including using paths
redundantly in case of failure, or applying heuristics to find a path of minimum length
(Figure 19.7c).
The application programmer can also supply software called filters that run on
each of the nodes to intercept the flow of matching data passing through the node. For
example, a filter could suppress duplicate animal-detection alarms that derive from
different nodes sensing the same animal (possibly the node between the sources and sink
inFigure 19.7c).
Another data-oriented approach to programming sensor networks is distributed
query processing [Gehrke and Madden 2004]. In this case, however, an SQL-like
language is used to declare queries that will be executed collectively by the nodes. The
optimum plan for executing a query is typically processed on the user’s PC or base
station outside the network, taking into account any known costs associated with the use


===== page 870 =====
852 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
of particular sensor nodes. The base station distributes the optimized query to the nodes
in the network along dynamically discovered routes, taking into account the
communication patterns that processing the query entails, such as sending data to
collection points for averaging. As with directed diffusion, data can be aggregated in the
network to amortize communication costs. The results flow back to the base station for
further processing.
19.4.3 Location sensing
Of all the types of sensing used in ubiquitous computing, location sensing has received
the most attention. Location is an obvious parameter for mobile, context-aware
computing. It seems natural to make applications and devices behave in a way that
depends on where the user is, as in our example of the context-aware phone. But location
sensing has many other uses, from assisting users in navigating through urban or rural
areas to determining network routes by geography [Imielinski and Navas 1999].
Location-sensing systems are designed to obtain data about the position of
entities, including objects and humans, within some type of region of interest. Here we
concentrate on entities’ locations, but some technologies also derive values for their
orientation and higher-order values such as their velocities.
An important distinction, especially when it comes to privacy, is whether an object
or user determines its own location, or whether something else determines its location.
The latter case is known as tracking.
Figure 19.8 (based on a similar figure in Hightower and Borriello [2001]) shows
some types of location technologies, and some of their principal characteristics. One
characteristic is the mechanism used to derive a location. That mechanism sometimes
imposes limitations on where the technology can be deployed, such as whether the
technology works indoors or outdoors, and what installations are required in the local
infrastructure. The mechanism is also associated with an accuracy, given in Figure 19.8
to an order of magnitude. Next, different technologies yield different types of data about
an object’s location. Finally, technologies differ in what information, if any, is supplied
about the entity being located, which is relevant to users’ concerns about privacy.
Additional technologies are surveyed in Hightower and Borriello.
The US Global Positioning System (GPS) is the most well-known instance of a
satellite navigation system – a system for determining the approximate position of a
receiver or unit from satellite signals. Other satellite navigation systems are the Russian
GLONASS system and the planned European Galileo system. GPS, which functions
only outdoors because of signal attenuation inside buildings, is used routinely in
vehicles and in handheld navigation devices, and increasingly for less conventional
applications such as the delivery of location-dependent media to people in urban areas
[Hull et al. 2004]. The receiver’s position is calculated with respect to a subset of 24
satellites that are orbiting the Earth in six planes, 4 satellites per plane. Each satellite
orbits the Earth about twice per day, broadcasting the current time from an on-board
atomic clock and information about its locations over a range of times (as judged by
observations from ground stations). The receiver whose location is to be determined
calculates its distance from each of several visible satellites using the difference between
the time of arrival of the signal and the time it was broadcast – that is, the time encoded
in the signal – and an estimate of the speed of radio propagation from the satellite to


===== page 871 =====
SECTION 19.4 SENSING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 853
Figure 19.8 Some location-sensing technologies
Type Mechanism Limitations Accuracy Type of location data Privacy
GPS Multilateration Outdoors 1–10 m Absolute geographic Yes
from satellite radio only (satellite coordinates (latitude,
sources visibility) longitude, altitude)
Radio Broadcasts from Areas with 10 m–1 km Proximity to known Yes
beaconing wireless base wireless entity (usually
stations (cellular, coverage semantic)
802.11, Bluetooth)
Active Bat Multilateration Ceiling- 10 cm Relative (room) Bat
from radio and mounted coordinates identity
ultrasound sensors disclosed
Ultra Wide Multilateration Receiver 15 cm Relative (room) Tag
Band from reception of installations coordinates identity
radio pulses disclosed
Active Infrared sensing Sunlight or room size Proximity to known Badge
Badge fluorescent entity (usually identity
light semantic) disclosed
Automatic RFID, Near Field Reader 1 cm–10 m Proximity to known Tag
identification Communication, installations entity (usually identity
tag visual tag (e.g. semantic) disclosed
barcode)
Easy Living Vision, Camera Variable Relative (room) No
triangulation installations coordinates
Earth. The receiver then calculates its position using a trigonometric calculation known
asmultilateration. At least three satellites must be visible from the receiver to obtain a
position. The receiver can calculate only its latitude and longitude if just three satellites
are visible; with more satellites visible, altitude can also be calculated.
Another positioning method that potentially works over a wide area, at least in
highly populated regions, is to identify nearby beacons in the form of fixed wireless
nodes with a limited transmission range. Devices can compare signal strengths as a
measure of which beacon is nearest. Cellular base stations for mobile phones (also
known as cell towers) each have a cell ID; 802.11 access points have a Basic Service Set
Identifier (BSSID). Some beacons broadcast identifying information; others are
discovered. For example, many 802.11 access points broadcast their identifiers, while a
Bluetooth device provides its identifier upon discovery by another device.
Radio beaconing does not determine an entity’s position per se,only its proximity
to another entity. If the beacon’s position is known, then the target entity’s position is
known to within the beacon’s radio range. Absolute positioning requires looking up the
beaconed identifier in a database of locations. Telecommunication providers disclose
positioning information using the locations of their cell towers, either directly or via
third parties. Some companies, such as Google, use vehicles to systematically trawl


===== page 872 =====
854 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.9 Locating an active bat within a room
1. Base station sends timing signal
to ultrasound receivers and radio
signal to bat simultaneously
3. Ultrasound receivers
report times of flight of 4. Base station computes distances
ultrasound pulse to ultrasound receivers from
times of flight, and thus position
2. Active bat of bat
emits ultrasound signal
on receipt of radio signal
areas for 802.11 access points, which they map using GPS positioning. A smart phone’s
location can be determined to within tens of metres when in range of such a mapped
access point (assuming that the access point has not been relocated, which sometimes
occurs).
Proximity can be a useful property in itself. For example, using proximity it is
possible to create location-aware applications that are triggered by the return to a
previously visited location – a user waiting at a train station could create an alert
reminding them to buy a new monthly train ticket when they enter the proximity of the
train station (that is, when their device receives the same beaconed identifier) on the first
of the month. Bluetooth, an alternative radio technology, has the interesting property
that some radio beacons – for example, ones integrated with mobile phones – are
themselves mobile. This can be useful too. For example, train commuters could receive
data from people they frequently travel with – ‘familiar strangers’ – provided via their
mobile phones.
Turning back to more definite forms of positioning, GPS derives an object’s
absolute (that is, global) coordinates outdoors. By contrast, the Active Bat system
[Harter et al. 2002] was designed to determine an object’s or human’s location indoors,
inrelative coordinates – that is, with respect to the room in which the object or user is
located (Figure 19.9). The Active Bat system is accurate to about 10 cm. Relatively
accurate indoor location informationis useful for applications such as detecting which
screen a user is nearest to and ‘teleporting’ their PC’s desktop to that screen using the
VNC protocol (see ‘Thin client implementations’ in Section 2.3.2). A bat is a device that
is attached to the user or object whose location is to be found, and that receives radio
signals and emits ultrasound signals. The system relies on a grid of ultrasound receivers
at known locations in the ceiling, wired to a base station. To locate a bat, the base station
simultaneously emits a radio signal to the bat containing its identifier, and a wired signal
to the ceiling-mounted ultrasound receivers. When the bat with the given identifier
receives the base station’s signal, it emits a short ultrasound pulse. When a receiver in
the ceiling receives the base station’s signal, it starts a timer. Since the speed of
electromagnetic propagation is so much greater than the speed of sound, the emission of
the ultrasound pulse and the start of the timer are effectively simultaneous. When a
ceiling receiver receives the corresponding ultrasound pulse (from the bat), it reads the
elapsed time and forwards it to the base station, which uses an estimate of the speed of


===== page 873 =====
SECTION 19.4 SENSING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 855
sound to deduce the receiver’s distance from the bat. If the base station receives
distances from at least three non-colinear ultrasound receivers, it can compute the bat’s
position in 3D space.
Ultra Wide Band (UWB) is a wireless communication technology for propagating
data at high bit rates (100 Mbps or more) over short ranges (up to 10 m). The bits are
propagated at very low power but over a very wide frequency spectrum, using thin
pulses – on the order of 1 ns in width. Given the size and shape of the pulse, it is possible
to measure times of flight with great accuracy. By arranging receivers in the
environment and using multilateration it is possible to determine a UWB tag’s
coordinates to an accuracy of about 15cm. Unlike the above technologies, UWB signals
propagate through walls and other typical objects found in the built environment. Its low
power consumption is another advantage.
Some researchers have experimented with the use of existing wireless nodes such
as 802.11 wireless access points to go beyond simple beaconing, and to attempt to infer
the location of a wireless client by measuring signal strength with respect to several
access points. In practice, the presence of other entities in the environment that
attenuate, reflect or refract the signal means that signal strength is not a simple function
of distance from the transmitter. One approach to dealing with that issue is
fingerprinting, which probabilistically determines locations from signal strength
characteristics as measured throughout the space. As part of the Place Lab project,
Cheng et al. [2005] consider some techniques for determining locations from signal
strengths, the accuracy that can be obtained and the amount of calibration that is
involved.
The preceding technologies provide data about an object’s physical location: its
coordinates in a physical region. One advantage of knowing a physical location is that,
through databases including geographical information systems (GIS) and world models
of built spaces, a single location can be related to many types of information about the
object or its relationship to other objects. However, considerable effort is required to
produce and maintain those databases, which can be subject to high rates of change.
By contrast, the Active Badge system (Section 19.1) produces an object’s
semantic location: the location’s name or description. For example, if a badge is sensed
by the infrared receiver in room ‘101’, then the location of that badge is determined to
be ‘Room 101’. (Unlike with most radio signals, building materials strongly attenuate
infrared signals so the badge is unlikely to be outside the room.) That data tells us
nothing explicitly about the location in space, but it does provide users with information
that relates to their knowledge of the world they live in. By contrast, the latitude and
longitude of the same place, such as 51° 27.010 N, 002° 37.107 W, is useful for, say,
calculating distances to other places; but it is difficult for humans to work with. Note
that radio beacons – which invert Active Badge technologies by placing the receiver on
the target to be located rather than in the infrastructure – can be used to provide either
semantic or physical locations.
Active Badges are a specialized form of automatic identification tags:
electronically readable identifiers designed typically for mass industrial applications.
Automatic identification tags include RFID [Want 2004], Near Field Communication
(NFC) tags [www.nfc-forum.org] and glyphs or other visual symbols such as barcodes
– especially those designed to be readable at a distance by cameras [de Ipiña et al. 2002].
These tags are attached to the object whose location is to be determined. When they are


===== page 874 =====
856 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
read by a reader with a limited range and at a known location, the target object’s location
becomes known.
Finally, computer vision techniques may be used to locate an object such as a
human viewed by one or more cameras. The Easy Living project [Krumm et al. 2000]
used vision algorithms on feeds from several cameras. A target object can be located if
it can be recognized by a camera at a known location. With several cameras at known
locations, in principle the differences between the object’s appearances in their images
can be used to determine the object’s location more acurately. More specialized devices
combine visible light imaging with infrared range-finding to determine the presence of
humans and the placement of their hands and limbs as gestural inputs, for example to
games.
As demonstrated in the Cooltown case study (Section 19.7.2), some of the above
location technologies – especially automatic identification tags and infrared beacons –
can also be used to provide access to information and services concerning the entity to
which they are attached, through the identifiers they make available.
How do the above technologies compare with respect to privacy? The GPS
solution provides absolute privacy: at no point in the GPS’s operation is information
about the receiving device transmitted elsewhere. Radio beaconing can also provide
absolute privacy but it depends on how it is used. If a device simply listens for beacons
and never otherwise communicates with the infrastructure, then it maintains privacy. By
contrast, the other technologies are tracking technologies. Active Bats, UWB, Active
Badges and automatic identification methods each yield an identifier to the
infrastructure indicating presence in a known location at a known time. Even if the
associated user does not disclose their identity, it might be possible to infer it. Finally,
Easy Living’s vision techniques rely on recognizing users in order to locate them, so the
user’s identity is much more directly disclosed.
Architectures for location-sensing • Two of the key characteristics required for location
systems are: generality with respect to the types of sensor used for location-sensing, and
scalability with respect to the number of objects to be located and the rate of location
update events occurring when mobile objects such as people and vehicles change their
locations. Researchers and developers have produced architectures for location sensing
in the small – in individual smart spaces such as rooms, buildings, or natural
environments covered by sensor networks – and for highly scalable geographic
information systems intended to cover large areas and include the locations of very
many objects.
The location stack [Hightower et al. 2002, Graumann et al. 2003] is aimed at
meeting the requirement for generality. It divides location-sensing systems for
individual smart spaces into layers. The sensor layer contains drivers for extracting raw
data from a variety of location sensors. The measurements layer then turns that raw data
into common measurement types including distance, angle and velocity. The fusion
layer is the lowest layer available to applications. It combines the measurements from
different sensors (typically of different types) to infer the location of an object and
provide it through a uniform interface. Since sensors produce uncertain data, the
inferences of the fusion layer are probabilistic. Fox et al. [2003] survey some of the
Bayesian techniques available. The arrangements layer deduces relationships between
objects, such as whether they are co-located. Above those are layers for combining


===== page 875 =====
SECTION 19.5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 857
location data with data from other types of sensors to determine more complex
contextual attributes, such as whether a group of people located in a house are all asleep.
Scalability is a major concern in geographic information systems.
Spatio-temporal queries such as ‘Who has been in this building in the last 60 days?’, ‘Is
someone following me?’ or ‘Which moving objects in this region are most in danger of
colliding?’ illustrate the need for scalability. The number of objects – in particular, the
number of mobile objects – to be located and the number of concurrent queries may be
large. Moreover, in the last of those example queries, real-time responsiveness is
required. The obvious approach to making location systems scalable is to divide the
region of interest recursively into subregions, using data structures such as quadtrees.
Such indexing of spatial and temporal databases is an active area of research.
19.4.4 Summary and perspective
This section has described some of the infrastructures that have been devised for
context-aware computing. We have concentrated primarily on the ways in which sensors
are harnessed to produce the contextual attributes on which applications depend for their
behaviour. We looked at architectures for relatively static collections of sensors, and
architectures for highly volatile sensor networks. Finally, we described some
technologies for the particularly important case of location sensing, some of which are
in widespread use. The World Wide Web Consortium’s (W3C) geolocation API
[www.w3.org XXIV] includes support for presenting location-specific web content to a
user by automatically sensing their location with a mobile device using GPS or
proximity of a cell tower or 802.11 access point, as discussed above.
Through context awareness, we integrate the everyday physical world with com-
puter systems. A key problem remaining is that, compared to the subtle understanding
that humans have of their physical world, the systems we have described are quite crude.
Not only are sensors (at least, those cheap enough to deploy widely) inevitably inaccu-
rate, but the final stage of producing semantically rich information accurately from raw
sensor data is extremely difficult. The world of robotics (which involves actuation, a
topic we have ignored, in addition to sensing) has been tackling this difficulty for many
years. In tightly restricted domains such as domestic vacuum cleaning or industrial pro-
duction, robots can perform reasonably well. But generalization from those domains re-
mains elusive.
19.5 Security and privacy
Volatile systems raise many new issues for both security and privacy. First, users and
administrators of volatile systems require security for their data and resources
(confidentiality, integrity and availability). However, as we pointed out when describing
the model of volatile systems in Section 19.1, trust – the basis for all security – is often
lowered in volatile systems, because the principals whose components interact
spontaneously may have little, if any, prior knowledge of one another, and may not have
a trusted third party in common. Second, many users are concerned about their privacy
– roughly speaking, their ability to control the accessibility of information about


===== page 876 =====
858 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
themselves. But privacy is potentially more threatened than ever before due to sensing
in the smart spaces users pass through.
Despite these challenges, measures to ensure people’s security and privacy must
be lightweight – partly to preserve the spontaneity of interactions, and partly because of
the restricted user interfaces of many devices. People will not want, for example, to ‘log
in’ to a smart pen before they use it in their host’s office!
In this section we outline some of the main security and privacy problems for
volatile systems. Stajano [2002] gives a more detailed treatment of some of these issues.
Langheinrich [2001] examines the topic of privacy in ubiquitous computing, starting
from its historical and legal context.
19.5.1 Background
Security and privacy are complicated in volatile systems by hardware-related issues
such as resource poverty, and because their spontaneity leads to new types of resource
sharing.
Hardware-related issues • Conventional security protocols tend to make assumptions
about devices and connectivity that often do not hold in volatile systems. First, portable
devices such as smart phones and sensor nodes can, in general, be more easily stolen and
tampered with than devices such as PCs in locked rooms. A security design for volatile
systems should not rely on the integrity of any subset of devices that could feasibly be
compromised. For example, if a smart space spans a large enough physical area, then
one way to help protect the system’s overall integrity is to make it necessary for an
attacker to visit many locations within it at more or less the same time if their attack is
to succeed [Anderson et al. 2004].
Second, devices in volatile systems sometimes do not have sufficient computing
resources for asymmetric (public-key) cryptography – even when using elliptic curve
cryptography (Section 11.3.2). SPINS [Perrig et al. 2002] provides security guarantees
for the data that low-power nodes in wireless sensor networks exchange in a potentially
hostile environment. Their protocols use only symmetric-key cryptography, which,
unlike asymmetric-key cryptography, is feasible on such low-power devices. However,
that begs the question of which nodes in a wireless sensor network should share the same
symmetric key. At one extreme, if all nodes share the same key, then a successful attack
on one node will compromise the entire system. At the other extreme, if each node
shares a distinct key with every other node, then there may be too many keys for nodes
with limited memory to store. A compromise position is for nodes to share keys only
with their nearest neighbours, and to rely on chains of mutually trusting nodes that
encrypt messages hop-by-hop, rather than using end-to-end encryption.
Third, as always, energy is an issue. Not only must security protocols be designed
to minimize communication overheads to preserve battery life, but in addition limited
energy is the basis for a new type of denial of service attack. Stajano and Anderson
[1999] describe the ‘sleep deprivation torture attack’ on battery-powered nodes: an
attacker can deny service by sending spurious messages to run down devices’ batteries
as they waste energy receiving them. Martin et al. [2004] describe other ‘sleep
deprivation’ attacks, including more covertly providing devices with code or data that
causes them to waste energy through processing. For example, an attacker could provide


===== page 877 =====
SECTION 19.5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 859
an animated GIF image that appears static to the user but actually causes constant
re-rendering.
Finally, disconnected operation means that it is preferable to avoid security
protocols that rely on continuous online access to a server. For example, suppose that
vending machines at rest stops are to dispense certain refreshments for free, but only to
bona fide passengers of a specific bus company. Rather than assuming that such a
machine is always connected to the company headquarters to verify authorization, it is
better to design a protocol whereby the user’s device (such as a phone) is given a
certificate enabling the vending machine to verify authorization using only Bluetooth or
other short-range communication [Zhang and Kindberg 2002]. Unfortunately, the
absence of an online server also means that a certificate cannot be revoked and can only
be constructed to expire by a given time – begging the question of how offline devices
are to keep securely accurate time.
New types of resource-sharing: example problems • Volatile systems give rise to new
types of resource sharing that require new security designs, such as the following
examples:
(cid:129) The administrators of a smart space expose a service accessible to visitors over a
wireless network –such as sending slides to the projection service in a seminar
room or using a printer in a café.
(cid:129) Two employees of the same company who encounter one another at a conference
wirelessly exchange a document between their mobile phones or other portable
devices.
(cid:129) A nurse takes a wireless heart-rate monitor from a box of similar devices, attaches
it to a patient and associates it to the clinical data-logging service for that patient.
Each of these cases is an example of spontaneous interoperation; each raises security
and/or privacy issues. None is quite like the resource-sharing patterns normally
encountered within firewall-protected intranets or on the open Internet.
The projection and printing services are intended only for visitors, but the wireless
network might extend beyond the building’s boundaries, from where attackers could
eavesdrop, disrupt presentations or send bogus print jobs. So the services require
protection, similarly to a web server intended only for members of a club. But logging
in – typing a username and password – and the registration procedure that preceded it
would require too much effort, and users might object on privacy grounds.
The document exchange between two employees is similar in some ways to
sending an email within a corporate intranet, yet the interaction takes place over a public
wireless network in a place filled mostly with unknown people. A trusted third party
(their company) exists in principle, but in practice it may not be reachable (they may not
be able to obtain a good enough wireless telecommunications signal for their phones in
the conference hall) or it may not be configured in all the users’ devices.
What the nurse does is in some ways similar to the first example: she appropriates
a trusted device temporarily but securely, as a visitor might appropriate a projector or
printer. But this example is intended to show more emphatically the issue of reuse. There
may be a confusing number of wireless sensors used for different patients at different
times, and it is essential to securely make and break associations between the devices
and the respective patient logs.


===== page 878 =====
860 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.10 Secure device association using physical contact
W
K
1. Fresh secret key K exchanged by physical contact 2. Devices communicate using secure channel
constructed over W using K
19.5.2 Some solutions
We now examine some attempts to solve the problems of providing security and privacy
in volatile systems: secure spontaneous device association, location-based
authentication and privacy protection. The security techniques we describe depart
markedly from standard approaches in distributed systems. They exploit the fact that the
systems we are considering are integrated into our everyday physical world, by using
physical evidence rather than cryptographic evidence to bootstrap security properties.
Secure spontaneous device association • An important question raised by the examples
in the preceding section is how to secure a spontaneous association between two devices
connected via wireless radio network, W. This is the secure spontaneous device
associationproblem, also known as the secure transient association problem. The goal
is to create a secure channel between two devices by securely exchanging a session key
between those two devices and using it to encrypt their communication over W. The
starting assumptions are that, since the association is spontaneous, neither device (or its
user) shares a secret with the other, that neither possesses the other’s public key and that
the devices do not have access to a trusted third party. An attacker can attempt to
eavesdrop on W and to replay and synthesize messages. In particular, an attacker may
attempt to launch a man-in-the-middle attack (described in Section 11.1.1).
A solution to this problem would enable a visitor to make a secure connection to
a projector or printer service, participants at a conference to securely exchange a
document between their portable devices and a nurse to securely connect a wireless
heart-rate monitor to a data-logging unit by the patient’s bed.
No amount of communication over W will enable secure key exchange by itself,
so out-of-band communication is required. In particular, the standard method for
establishing a link-level key between two devices connected by Bluetooth relies on the
out-of-band actions of one or more users. A digit string chosen on one device must be
entered by a user at the other device. But this method is often not carried out securely,
since simple, short digit strings such as ‘0000’ tend to be used, which attackers can learn
by exhaustive search.
Another approach to solving the secure association problem is to use a side
channel with certain physical properties. Specifically, the propagation of signals over
this side channel is constrained in angle, range or timing (or a combination of those). To
a first degree of approximation, we can infer properties about the sender or receiver of
messages on such channels that enable us to establish secure association with a


===== page 879 =====
SECTION 19.5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 861
physically demonstrable device, as we show shortly. Kindberg et al. [2002b]call them
physically constrained channels, the term we shall use here;Balfanz et al. [2002] refer
to location-limited channels. Stajano and Anderson [1999] first exploited such a side
channel in the form of physical contact. We introduced some examples of these channels
for the purposes of physical device association in Section 19.2.2.
In one scenario, one of the devices generates a fresh session key and sends it to the
other over a receive-constrained channel that provides a degree of secrecy – that is, it
constrains which devices can receive the key. Some examples of technologies for
receive-constrained channels are:
Physical contact: Each device has terminals for direct electrical connection [Stajano
and Anderson 1999]. See Figure 19.10.
Infrared: Infrared beams can be made directional to within about 60 degrees and are
largely attenuated by walls and windows. A user can ‘beam’ a key to the required
receiver device over a distance of up to about a metre [Balfanz et al. 2002].
Audio: Data can be transmitted as modulations of an audio signal, such as music
playing softly throughout a room, but with little reach beyond it [Madhavapeddy et
al.2003]
Laser: One user points their device’s narrow data-carrying laser beam onto a
receiver on the other device [Kindberg and Zhang 2003a]. This method allows for
more precision than the other long-range techniques.
Barcode and camera: One device displays the secret key as a barcode (or other
decodable image) on its display, which another device, that is, one equipped with a
camera – such as a camera phone – reads and decodes. This method’s precision is
inversely related to the distance between the devices.
In general, physically constrained channels provide only a limited degree of security. An
attacker with a sufficiently sensitive receiver can eavesdrop on infrared or audio signals;
an attacker with a powerful camera may be able to read a barcode even on a small
display. Laser light is subject to atmospheric scattering, although quantum modulation
techniques can make the scattered signal useless to an eavesdropper [Gibson et al.
2004]. However, when the technologies are deployed in appropriate circumstances, the
attacks entail considerable effort and the security obtained may be good enough for
everyday purposes.
A second approach for securely exchanging a session key is to use a constrained
channel to physically authenticate one device’s public key, which it sends to the other
device. The devices then engage in a standard protocol to exchange a session key using
the authenticated public key. Of course, this method assumes that the devices are
powerful enough to perform public-key cryptography.
The simplest way of authenticating the public key is for the device to send it over
a send-constrained channel, which enables a user to authenticate the key as deriving
from that physical device. There are several ways to implement suitable
send-constrained channels. For example, physical contact provides a send-constrained
channel since only a directly connected device can send on the channel. Exercise 19.14
invites the reader to consider which of the other techniques for receive-constrained
channels described above also provide send-constrained channels. Moreover, it is


===== page 880 =====
862 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.11 Detecting a man in the middle
hash=0x6F9E...
K2
2. User(s) compare hashes of keys displayed on
1. Keys exchanged by Man in the middle devices, by sight or with an integrated imaging
Diffie-Hellman device. Since they differ, they conclude that
protocol there is a man in the middle or that accidental
K1 misassociation has occurred
hash=0xD57C...
Device displaying hash of key
possible to implement a send-constrained channel using a receive-constrained channel,
or vice versa (see Exercise 19.15).
A third approach utilizing physically constrained channels is for the devices to
exchange a session key optimistically but insecurely, and then to use a physically
constrained channel to validate the key – that is, to verify that the key is possessed solely
by the required physical source.
First we consider how to exchange a session key spontaneously but possibly with
the wrong principal, and then we go on to examine some technologies for validating the
exchange. If validation fails, then the process can be repeated.
In Section 19.2.2 we described physical and human-mediated techniques for
associating two devices, such as the two-button protocol in which devices exchange
their network addresses when humans press buttons on them more or less
simultaneously. It is straightforward to adapt that protocol so that the devices also
exchange session keys using the Diffie–Hellman protocol [Diffie and Hellman 1976].
But, as it stands, that method is not secure: it is still possible for separate groups of users
to accidentally misassociate devices by running the protocol concurrently, and for
malicious parties to launch man-in-the-middle attacks.
It is a property of the Diffie–Hellman protocol that a man in the middle cannot
(except with negligible probability) exchange the same key with each device, so we can
validate the association by comparing the secure hashes of the keys obtained by the two
devices after running the Diffie–Hellman protocol (Figure 19.11). The following
techniques enable us to validate a key before using it. They involve send-constrained
channels, although receive-constrained channels could also be used (see Exercise
19.15):
Displayed hashes: Stajano and Anderson [1999] pointed out that each device could
display the hash of its public key as hexadecimal characters or in some other form
that humans can compare. However, they argued that this type of human involvement
is too error-prone. The barcode method mentioned above would be more reliable.
That method is another example of using a send-constrained channel: the optical path
between the display of one device and the camera of the other brought close to it
securely propagates the secure hash from the required device.


===== page 881 =====
SECTION 19.5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 863
Ultrasound: An ultrasound signal, in combination with a radio signal, can be used to
infer the distance and direction of the device that sent a hash, using techniques similar
to those used for the Active Bat system described in Section 19.4.3 [Kindberg and
Zhang 2003b].
The above methods vary in the degree of security they provide because of the properties
of constrained channels, but all are suitable for spontaneous association. None requires
online access to any other component, and none requires users to authenticate
themselves or to find out electronic names or identifiers for the devices – instead, the
users are provided with physical evidence about which devices have been securely
associated. By assumption, the users have established trust in those devices (and their
users). Of course, the security that has been achieved is only as good as the
trustworthiness of the devices involved: it is possible to ‘securely associate’ a device
with another that in fact launches an attack.
Stajano and Anderson [1999, Stajano 2002] used physically constrained channels
in the context of the ‘resurrecting duckling’ protocol. That protocol is relevant to the
example of the wireless heart-rate monitor, where several identical devices are to be
associated and reassociated securely between patients. The name of the protocol refers
to the fact that (actual) ducklings begin life in the imprintable state and come under the
control of whatever entity they first recognize (ideally, their biological mothers!) – a
process known as imprinting. In our case, the ‘duckling’ device comes under the control
of the first device associated with it and then refuses requests from any other entity –
that is, any principal that does not know the secret key that the ‘duckling’ exchanged
with its ‘mother’ at the point of imprinting. Reassociation can only occur by first ‘killing
the duckling’s soul’ – for example, when the ‘mother’ instructs the ‘duckling’ to
reassume the imprintable state, in at which point its memory is securely wiped. From
that point, the ‘duckling’ is prepared to be controlled by the next device that associates
with it.
Location-based authentication • The examples of a visitor using a seminar room’s
projection service and a user printing documents in a café can be looked at from both the
visitors’ and the administrators’ perspectives. From the visitors’ point of view, they can
securely associate their devices to the projector or printer using one of the
aforementioned physically constrained channels, so as to protect the privacy and
integrity of their data (although printing a sensitive document in a café may be unwise).
But the administrators of each of those smart spaces has an additional
requirement: as well as wanting their visitors to enjoy security, they need to implement
access control. Only people physically in their spaces (speakers in their seminar room,
people drinking the café’s coffee) should be able to use their services. And yet, as we
have explained, authenticating users’ identities may be inappropriate because of the
visitors’ requirements for privacy and the administrators’ need to integrate a stream of
users and devices that spontaneously appear and disappear.
An approach to authorization that meets those requirements is to base access
control on the location of the services’ clients, rather than their identity. Kindberg et al.
[2002b] describe a protocol for authenticating the clients’ locations using a physically
constrained channel that pervades the smart space but does not reach beyond it. For
example, that channel could be constructed using music playing in a café or infrared in
a meeting room. There is also a location authentication proxy embedded in the


===== page 882 =====
864 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
corresponding smart space – that is, directly connected to the same constrained channel
– which the location-specific services trust. For example, the Acme café company might
want to reward customers throughout its chain with free media downloads, but wants to
ensure that no one outside an Acme café can access the media, even though the
download service is centralized and connected to the Internet. The protocol assumes that
users access services through a web browser and uses web redirection so that the
visitors’ devices transparently obtain proof from the location authentication proxy that
they are where they claim to be, and forwards this proof to the target service.
Sastry et al. [2003] use temporally constrained channels implemented using
ultrasound to verify location claims. The basis of their protocol is that, since the speed
of sound is physically constrained, only a device that is where it claims to be can
transmit a message quickly enough by ultrasound to a destination at the location, when
echoing a nonce contained in a request packet.
As with secure device association, location authentication only secures a system
to a limited extent. Even though a service has verified a client to be in a bona fide
location, that client could nonetheless be malicious and act as a proxy for clients at other
locations.
Privacy protection • Location-based authentication demonstrates a trade-off that makes
it difficult to protect privacy in volatile systems: even though the user withholds their
identity, they disclose a location that may be unwittingly associated with other types of
potentially identifying information. Safeguards are needed on all channels through
which information about the user may flow. For example, even if a user accesses an
electronic service anonymously in a café, their privacy may be destroyed if a camera
captures them. And if a user needs to pay for a service, they will have to supply
electronic payment details, even if they do so via a third party. They may also buy goods
that have to be physically delivered to their home or work address.
At the system level, the basic threat is that, wittingly or unwittingly, users provide
identifiers of various kinds to smart spaces when they visit them and access services
there. First, they may provide names and addresses in service accesses. Second, the
Bluetooth or IEEE 802.11 network interfaces on their personal devices each maintain a
constant MAC-level address that is visible to other devices such as access points. Third,
if users carry tags such as RFID tags (for example, ones embedded in their clothes so
that their smart washing machines can automatically choose an appropriate washing
cycle), then smart spaces could potentially sense those tags at doorways and other
‘pinch-points’. The RFIDs are globally unique and may be used both to identify what
the user has with them (e.g., as the type of clothes they are wearing) and for tracking
purposes.
Whatever their source, identifiers can become associated with a location and an
activity at a given time, and thus may potentially be linked to the user’s personal
information. Users in a smart space may eavesdrop and gather the identifiers. If smart
spaces (or services embedded in smart spaces) collude, they could track identifiers
across locations and infer movements, all potentially leading to loss of privacy.
Research is underway into how to make what are currently hard-wired identifiers
(such as wireless MAC addresses and RFIDs) into ‘soft’ addresses that may be replaced
from time to time to inhibit tracking. The difficulty with MAC addresses (as well as
higher-level network addresses such as IP addresses) is that changing them causes


===== page 883 =====
SECTION 19.5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 865
disruptions to communication, which must be traded off against privacy [Gruteser and
Grunwald 2003]. The difficulty with RFIDs is that, while an RFID-bearing user does not
want to be tracked by the ‘wrong’ sensors, in general the user does want the tags to be
read by certain ‘right’ sensors (such as the one in their washing machine). A technique
to address that problem is for the tag to use (one-way) hash functions both to replace the
stored identifier and to generate the emitted identifier each time it is read [Ohkubo et al.
2003]. Only a trusted party that knows the tag’s original unique identifier can use an
emitted identifier to verify which tag was read. Moreover, since tags pass their stored
identifier through a one-way hash function before emitting them, attackers are unable
(unless they can tamper with the tag) to learn the stored identifier and thus spoof the tag
–for example, with the intention of falsely claiming that a tagged user was present at the
scene of a crime.
Turning to the software identifiers that clients provide to services, an obvious
approach to help safeguard privacy is to substitute either an anonymous identifier – one
randomly chosen for every service request – or a pseudonym: a false identifier that is
nonetheless used consistently for the same client principal for some period of time. The
advantage of a pseudonym over an anonymous identifier is that it enables a client to
build a relationship of trust or a good reputation with a given service, but without
necessarily disclosing a true identity.
It would be far too laborious for a user to manage anonymous or pseudonymous
identifiers, so that is normally done by a system component called a privacy proxy. The
privacy proxy is a component that the user trusts to forward all service requests
anonymously. Each of the user’s devices has a secure, private channel to the privacy
proxy. That proxy substitutes anonymous identifiers or pseudonyms for all of the true
identifiers in service requests.
One problem with a privacy proxy is that it is a central point of vulnerability: if
the proxy is successfully attacked then all of the client’s service usage becomes
disclosed. Another problem is that proxies do not hide which services the user accesses.
An eavesdropper or a colluding set of eavesdroppers could employ traffic analysis: that
is, they could observe correlations in traffic between messages flowing to or from a
particular user’s device and messages flowing to or from a particular service –
examining such factors as the timing and sizes of the messages.
Mixing is a statistical technique for combining communications from many users
in such a way that attackers cannot easily disentangle one user’s actions from another,
and thus helping to safeguard the users’ privacy. One application of mixing is to
construct an overlay network of proxies that encrypt, aggregate, reorder and forward
messages between themselves for several hops after they have entered the network, in a
way that makes it hard to correlate any message entering the network from a client or
service with any message leaving it, to a particular service or client [Chaum 1981]. Each
proxy trusts and shares keys only with its neighbours. It would be difficult to
compromise the network without the collusion of all proxies. Al-Muhtadi et al. [2002]
describe an architecture for anonymously routing messages from a client in a smart
space to services.
Another application of mixing is to obscure users’ locations by exploiting the
presence of many users in each location. Beresford and Stajano [2003] describe a system
for obscuring users’ locations through the use of mix zones, which are regions where
users do not access location-aware services, such as hallways between smart rooms. The


===== page 884 =====
866 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
idea is that users change their pseudonymous identities in mix zones, where no user’s
location is known. If mix zones are sufficiently small and if enough people pass through
them, they can play a role akin to a mix network of anonymizing proxies. Exercise 19.16
considers mix zones in more depth.
19.5.3 Summary and perspective
This section has provided an introduction to the problems of providing security and
privacy in volatile systems, and a brief look at some attempts at solutions, including
secure spontaneous association, location-based authentication and various techniques
aimed at privacy protection. Widespread sensing, hardware-related issues such as
resource poverty, and spontaneous association are at the root of the difficulties. Sensing
heightens users’ privacy concerns, since not only can their service accesses be
monitored but such basic information as their locations can, too; and hardware-related
issues and spontaneity challenge our ability to provide security solutions. This is an
important area of research: security and, especially, privacy may turn out to be barriers
to the use of volatile systems.
19.6 Adaptation
The devices in the volatile systems studied in this chapter are much more heterogeneous
than PCs in terms of processing power, input/output capabilities such as screen size,
network bandwidth, memory and energy capacity. Heterogeneity is unlikely to ease
significantly because of the multiple purposes we have for devices. The demands of
carrying and embedding devices mean that the devices that are poorest and richest in
resources such as energy and screen size are likely to continue to differ by orders of
magnitude. (The only overall positive trend in resources is in increasingly dense but
affordable persistent storage [Want and Pering 2003].) And what is certain not to alter,
looking forward, is the presence of runtime change itself: runtime conditions such as the
available bandwidth and energy are prone dramatic changes.
This section introduces adaptive systems: ones that are based on a model of
varying resources and that adapt their runtime behaviour to the current resource
availability. The aim of adaptive systems is to accommodate heterogeneity by allowing
software reuse across contexts that vary in factors such as device capabilities and user
preferences, and to accommodate changing runtime resource conditions by adapting
application behaviour without sacrificing crucial application properties. But achieving
those goals can be extremely difficult. This section gives a flavour of both those areas
of adaptation.
19.6.1 Context-aware adaptation of content
In Section 19.3.1 we saw that some devices in volatile systems supply multimedia
content to one another. Multimedia applications (see Chapter 20) operate by exchanging
or streaming multimedia data such as images, audio and video.


===== page 885 =====
SECTION 19.6 ADAPTATION 867
A simple approach to exchanging content would be for content producers to send
the same content regardless of the content-consuming device, and for that device to
render the content appropriately for its needs and limitations. Indeed, that approach
sometimes works, as long as the content can be specified sufficiently abstractly that the
recipient device can always find a concrete representation to fit its needs.
However, it turns out that factors such as bandwidth limitations and device
heterogeneity make that approach impractical in general. The capabilities of devices in
volatile systems to receive, process, store and display multimedia content vary widely,
unlike those of PCs. Their screen sizes vary – some do not even have screens – so
sending fixed-size images and text in a fixed font size, all in a fixed layout, will often
lead to unsatisfactory results. The devices may or may not have all of the other forms of
I/O that are taken for granted on PCs: keyboards, microphones, audio output, etc. Even
if a device has I/O hardware to render a form of content such as video, it may not have
the software needed for a given encoding (for example, MPEG or QuickTime), or it may
have insufficient memory or processing resources to render media at full fidelity, such
as video at full resolution or frame rate. Finally, a device may have all the resources to
render given content, but if the bandwidth to the device is too low, then it cannot be sent
to it unless it is suitably compressed.
More generally, the content that a service needs to deliver to a given device is a
function of the context: the media producer should take account not only of the
consuming device’s capabilities, but also of such factors as the preferences of the
device’s user and the nature of the user’s task. For example, one user might prefer text
to images on a small screen; another might prefer audio output to visual output.
Moreover, the items that the service delivers within a piece of content may need to be a
function of the user’s task. For example, the features required in a map of a given region
will depend on whether the user is a tourist looking for attractions or a worker looking
for infrastructure access points [Chalmers et al. 2004]. On a screen-limited device, the
map is more likely to be legible if it contains just one type of feature.
It would be too much effort for multimedia content authors to hand-craft
individual solutions for many different contexts. The alternative is to adapt the original
data programatically into a suitable form, by selecting from it, generating content from
it or transforming it – or any combination of those three processes. Sometimes the
original data is expressed independently of how it should be presented – for example,
data might be held in XML form, and scripts in the eXtensible Style Language
Transformations (XSLT) used to create renderable forms for a given context. In other
cases, the original data is already a type of multimedia data, such as images; in that case,
the process of adapting it is known as transcoding. Adaptation can occur within media
types (for example, selecting from map data or reducing the resolution of an image) and
across media types (for example, converting text to speech or vice versa, according to
the user’s preferences or whether the consuming device has a display or supports audio
output).
The problem of content adaptation has received a lot of attention for client-server
systems on the Internet, and especially the Web. The web model is for adaptation to take
place in the resource-rich infrastructure – either in the service itself or in a proxy – and
not in the resource-poor client. The HTTP protocol allows a type of content negotiation
(see Section 5.2): a client specifies preferences for the MIME types of the content it can
accept in its request headers, and the server can try to match those preferences in the


===== page 886 =====
868 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
content it returns. But that mechanism is too limited for context-aware adaptation – for
example, the client can specify acceptable image encodings but not the device’s screen
size. The W3C, through its Device Independence working group [www.w3.org XIX],
and the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) [www.openmobilealliance.org] are developing
standards whereby device capabilities and configurations can be expressed in some
detail. The W3C produced the Composite Capabilities/Preferences Profile (CC/PP) to
enable devices of different classes to specify their capabilities and configurations such
as screen size and bandwidth. The OMA’s user agent profile specification provides a
CC/PP vocabulary for mobile phones. It can be so detailed for a given device as to
extend to over 10 kbytes. Such a profile would be too expensive in bandwidth and
energy to send along with requests, so a mobile phone sends only the URI of its profile
in a request header. The server retrieves the specification to provide matching content,
and caches the specification for future use.
An important type of adaptation for bandwidth-limited devices is type-specific
compression. Fox et al. [1998] describe an architecture in which proxies perform
compression on the fly between services (which may or may not be part of the Web) and
clients. They argue for three main features in their architecture:
(cid:129) To accommodate limited bandwidth, compression should be lossy but specific to
the media type, so that semantic information can be used to decide which media
features it is important to retain. For example, an image can be compressed by
throwing away colour information.
(cid:129) Transcoding should be performed on the fly because statically pre-prepared
content forms will not provide sufficient flexibility to cope with dynamic data and
an increasing set of permutations of clients and services.
(cid:129) Transcoding should be performed in proxy servers so that both clients and services
are transparently separated from transcoding concerns. No code has to be
rewritten, and the compute-intensive transcoding activity can be run on suitably
scalable hardware such as clusters of rack-mounted computers, to keep latencies
within acceptable bounds.
When it comes to volatile systems such as smart spaces, we have to revisit some of the
assumptions made for web and other Internet-scale adaptation. Volatile systems are
more demanding in that they may require adaptation between any pair of dynamically
associated devices, so adaptation is not restricted to clients of particular services in the
infrastructure. There are now potentially many more providers whose content needs to
be adapted. Moreover, those providers may be too resource-poor to perform certain
types of adaptation themselves.
One implication is for smart spaces to provide proxies in their infrastructure for
adapting content between the volatile components they host [Kiciman and Fox 2000,
Ponnekanti et al. 2001]. The second implication is the need to look more closely at
which types of content adaptation can and should be performed on small devices –in
particular, compression is an important example.
Even if there is a powerful adaptation proxy in the infrastructure, a device still has
to send its data to that proxy. We discussed above how communication is expensive
compared to processing. In principle, it may be most energy-efficient to compress data
prior to transmission. However, the pattern of memory accesses made during


===== page 887 =====
SECTION 19.6 ADAPTATION 869
compression has a strong effect on energy consumption. Barr and Asanovic [2003] show
that it may cost more energy to first compress data using default implementations, but
that careful optimization of compression and decompression algorithms, especially with
respect to memory accesses patterns, can lead to overall energy savings compared to
transmission of uncompressed data.
19.6.2 Adapting to changing system resources
While hardware resources such as screen size are heterogeneous across devices, they are
at least stable and well known. By contrast, applications also rely on resources that are
subject to change at runtime and that may be hard to predict, such as available energy
and network bandwidth. In this subsection we discuss techniques for dealing with those
changes to resource levels at runtime. We discuss operating system support for
applications running in volatile systems, and support in the smart space infrastructure
for enhancing the resources available to applications.
OS support for adaptation to volatile resources • Satyanarayanan [2001] describes three
approaches to adaptation. One approach is for applications to request and obtain
resource reservations. While resource reservation can be convenient for applications
(Chapter 20), satisfactory QoS guarantees are sometimes difficult to achieve in volatile
systems and are impossible in cases such as energy depletion. A second approach is to
notify the user of changed levels of resource availability so they can react appropriately.
For example, if bandwidth becomes low, the user of a video player could operate a slider
in the application to switch the frame rate or resolution. The third approach is for the OS
to notify the application of changing resource conditions, and for the application to adapt
according to its particular needs.
Odyssey [Noble and Satyanarayanan 1999] provides operating system support for
applications that adapt to changes in the available levels of resources such as network
bandwidth. For example, if the bandwidth drops, a video player could switch to a video
stream with fewer colours, or adjust the resolution or frame rate. In the Odyssey
architecture, applications manage data types such as video or images, and as resource
conditions change they adjust the fidelity – the type-specific quality – with which those
data are rendered. A system component called the viceroy divides the device’s total
resources between each of several applications running on it. At any time, each
application runs with a window of tolerance to changes in resource conditions. The
window of tolerance is an interval of resource levels that is chosen to be wide enough to
be realistic in terms of actual resource variations, but narrow enough for the application
to behave more or less consistently within those limits. When the viceroy has to change
resource levels to a value outside the window of tolerance, it makes an upcall into the
application, which then reacts accordingly. For example, a video player might change to
black and white if bandwidth hits a very low level; above that, it might smoothly adjust
the frame rate and/or resolution.
Taking advantage of smart space resources • Cyber foraging [Satyanarayanan 2001,
Goyal and Carter 2004, Balan et al. 2003] is where a processing-limited device
discovers a compute server in a smart space and offloads some of its processing load to
it. For example, converting the user’s speech to text is a processing-intensive activity,
and one that few portable devices are able to carry out satisfactorily. One aim is to


===== page 888 =====
870 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
increase application responsiveness for the user – a computer in the infrastructure can
have many times the processing power of a portable device. But this is also an example
ofenergy-aware adaptation: the other aim is to save the portable device’s batteries by
allocating work to the mains-powered compute server.
There are challenging requirements associated with cyber foraging. The
application needs to be decomposed in such a way that part of it can be processed
efficiently on a compute server, but the application should still function correctly (albeit
more slowly or with reduced fidelity) if no compute server is available. The compute
server should run a part of the application that involves relatively little communication
with the portable device – otherwise, the time taken by communication over a
low-bandwidth connection could outweigh the processing gains. Moreover, the overall
energy consumption for the portable device must be satisfactory. Since communication
is energy-intensive, it does not automatically follow that energy will be saved by using
a compute server; it may be that the energy costs of communication with the compute
server outweigh the energy savings from offloading processing.
Balanet al. [2003] discuss the problem of partitioning an application to meet the
foregoing challenges and describe a system for monitoring resource levels (such as
compute server availability, bandwidth and energy) and consequently adapting the
application’s partitioning between the portable device and compute servers using one of
a small set of decomposition options. For example, consider a situation in which a user
speaks into a mobile device to dictate text, which is then translated into a foreign
language (that of the country they are visiting). There are various ways of splitting this
application between the mobile device and compute servers, with different implications
for resource utilization. If several compute servers are available, then the various stages
of recognition and translation could be split between them; if only one compute server
is available, then they could be run together at that machine or split between the mobile
device and the compute server.
Goyal and Carter [2004] take a more static approach to dividing up the
application, which is assumed to have been decomposed into separate communicating
programs. For example, a mobile device could perform speech recognition in two ways.
In the first mode, the application runs entirely – and very slowly –on the mobile device.
In the second mode, the mobile device runs only the user interface, which ships the
digital audio of the user’s voice to a program running on a compute server; that program
sends the recognized text back for the mobile device to display. It would be very costly
in energy for the mobile device to send the recognition program to a computer server, so
the device sends the URL of the program instead, which the compute server downloads
from an external source and runs.
19.6.3 Summary and perspective
This section has described two main categories of adaptation in volatile systems, which
are motivated by their heterogeneity and the volatility of their runtime conditions: there
is adaptation of multimedia data to the context of the media consumer, such as the
characteristics of the device and the task of the device’s user, and there is adaptation to
the dynamic levels of system resources such as energy and bandwidth.
We argued that, in principle, it would be better to produce adaptive software that
can accommodate varying conditions according to a well-understood model of


===== page 889 =====
SECTION 19.7 CASE STUDY: COOLTOWN 871
variation, rather than to evolve software and hardware in an ad hoc fashion as the need
presses. However, making such adaptive software is difficult, and there is no general
agreement on how to do so. First, the models of variation themselves – of how
resourcing levels change and of how to react when they change – can be hard to derive
with any generality. Second, there are software engineering challenges. Finding suitable
points of adaptation in existing software requires intimate knowledge of its workings,
and attempts may not always be successful. However, when creating new adaptive
software from scratch, there are techniques from the software engineering community,
such as aspect-oriented programming [Elrad et al. 2001], that can help programmers
manage adaptation.
19.7 Case study: Cooltown
The goal of Hewlett-Packard’s Cooltown project [Kindberg et al. 2002a, Kindberg and
Barton 2001] was to provide infrastructure for nomadic computing [Kleinrock 1997], a
term the project used for human-oriented mobile and ubiquitous computing. ‘Nomadic’
refers to humans moving between places such as their homes, work-places and shops as
they go about their everyday lives. ‘Computing’ refers here to services provided to those
nomadic users – not just services such as email that can be provided anywhere there is
connectivity, but more particularly services integrated with entities in the everyday
physical world through which the users move. To access those services, humans are
assumed to carry or wear wirelessly connected sensor-equipped devices. This
description often refers to the most prevalent form of those devices at the time of the
project: PDAs. However, smart phones and more experimental devices such as smart
watches were also considered.
More specifically, the project’s aim was to apply lessons learned from the success
of the Web to nomadic computing, via two objectives. First, since the Web provides a
rich and extensible set of resources in the virtual world, much can potentially be gained
by extending the Web’s architecture and existing resources to the physical world. One
objective for the Cooltown design was expressed in the maxim ‘everything has a web
page’: each entity in our physical world, whether electronic or not, is to have an
associated web resource called a web presence, which the user is to be able to access
conveniently when in the presence of that entity. A web presence could simply be a web
page containing information about the entity, or it could be any service provided in
association with the entity. For example, the web presence of a physical product could
be a service for obtaining replacement parts.
The second objective was to achieve the Web’s high degree of interoperability for
interactions with devices. Nomadic users may need to interact in places they have never
visited before, with web presences they have never encountered before. It would not be
acceptable for users to have to load new software or reconfigure existing software on
their portable devices in order to benefit from those services.
The aspects of the Cooltown architecture that we concentrate on (Figure 19.12)
are: web presences; physical hyperlinks, which are links from physical entities to web
presences and thus to the hyperlinked resources of the Web; and eSquirt, a protocol for
interoperation with web-present devices.


===== page 890 =====
872 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Figure 19.12 Cooltown layers
eSquirt: URL exchange Context (aggregated web presences)
Web presences
Physical hyperlinks
Network service
ID resolution
Discovery
Direct URL sensing
ID sensing
19.7.1 Web presences
Cooltown considers physical entities to be divided into three categories: people, places
and things. The web presence of a person, place or thing is potentially any web resource
chosen to suit a specific application; but Cooltown adopts certain roles for the web
presences of people and places. The web presences of things and people are collected in
the web presences of places, so the description follows that order.
Things: A ‘thing’ is either a device or a non-electronic physical entity. Things
become web-present by having web servers embedded in them or by hosting their
web presence within a web server. If the thing is a device, then its URL is that of the
service it implements. For example, an ‘Internet radio’ is a music-playing device that
hosts its own web presence. A user who has discovered the URL of an Internet radio
retrieves a web page with controls that enables them to ‘tune’ it to an Internet
broadcasting source, adjust its settings (such as the volume) and perhaps upload the
user’s own sound file. But even non-electronic things may have a web presence – i.e.,
a web resource associated with the thing but hosted by a web server somewhere else.
For example, a printed document’s web presence could be its electronic document
counterpart: instead of having to photocopy the printed document (with a consequent
reduction in quality), a user can discover its web presence from the physical artefact
– as we explain in Section 19.7.2 – and request a new print. The web presence of a
music CD could be some associated digital content such as extra music clips and
photographs, hosted in its owner’s personal media collection.
People: People become web-present by offering global web home pages with
services to facilitate communications with them and by offering information about
their current context. For example, users without mobile phones could make their
local phone number available via their web presence – a value that their web presence
automatically updates as they move around. They might also choose for their web
presence to register their current location explicitly, through a link to the web
presence of the place in which they are physically present.
Places: Places are smart spaces, to use the terminology of this chapter. Places
become web-present by registering the web presences of people and things within


===== page 891 =====
SECTION 19.7 CASE STUDY: COOLTOWN 873
them – and even the web presences of nested or otherwise related places – with a
place-specific directory service (Section 13.3). A place’s directory also contains
relatively static information such as a description of the place’s physical properties
and function. The directory service enables components to discover and thus interact
with the dynamic set of web presences within the place. It is also used as a source of
information about the place and its contents to be presented to humans, in the form
of web pages.
The directory entries for the web presences within a place can be established in
two main ways. First, a network discovery service (Section 19.2.1) can be used to
automatically register any web presences that are implemented by devices within the
place’s subnet – devices that have wirelessly connected within the place, or the place’s
infrastructure servers. However, while network discovery services are useful, they
suffer from the problem that not all web presences are hosted by devices in the place’s
subnet. The web presences of non-electronic physical entities such as humans, printed
documents and music CDs that move into the place or are brought into it may be hosted
anywhere. Those web presences have to be registered there manually or via sensing
mechanisms, in a process called physical registration [Barton et al. 2002] – for example,
by sensing their RFID tags.
A service called a web presence manager [Debaty and Caswell 2001] manages
web-present places – for example, for all the rooms within a building – and it can also
manage the web presences of people and things. Places are a particular instance of the
Cooltown abstraction of a context: a set of related web-present entities linked together
for purposes such as browsing. The web presence manager relates each web-present
entity to the web presences of entities in its context. For example, if the entity is a thing,
its related entities could be the person who carries it and the place where it is located. If
the entity is a person, its related entities could be the things carried by the person, the
place where the person is currently located and possibly the directly surrounding
persons.
19.7.2 Physical hyperlinks
Web presences are web resources like any other, so web pages can contain text or image
links to web presences like any other links. But in that standard web-linking model the
user comes across the web presence of a person, place or thing via an information
source: the web page. The Cooltown design enables humans additionally to go directly
to web presences from their physical sources: namely, the specific physical people,
places or things that they have encountered in their everyday movements through the
physical world.
A physical hyperlink is any means by which a user can retrieve the URL of an
entity’s web presence from the physical entity itself or its immediate surroundings. We
now consider ways of implementing physical hyperlinks. First, consider the HTML
markup for a typical link in a web page, say:
<a href=“http://cdk4.net/ChopSuey.html”>Hopper’s painting Chop Suey</a>
That links the text ‘Hopper’s painting Chop Suey’ in a web page to a page at
http://cdk4.net/Hopper.html about the referenced Edward Hopper painting, Chop Suey.


===== page 892 =====
874 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
Now, consider the question of how a visitor to a museum who encounters the painting
there could ‘click on’ the painting to obtain information about it in the browser on their
mobile phone, PDA or other portable device. That would require a way of discovering
the URL from the physical configuration of the painting itself or its physical
surroundings. One way would be to write the URL on the wall by the painting so that
the user could type it into their device’s browser. But that would be inelegant and
laborious.
Instead, Cooltown utilizes the fact that users have sensors integrated with their
mobile devices. The project investigated two main approaches to discovering the URLs
of entities via those sensors: direct sensing and indirect sensing.
Direct sensing: In this model, the user’s device senses a URL directly from a tag (an
‘automatic identification’ tag) or beacon attached to the entity of interest or positioned
next to it (see Section 19.4.3). A relatively large entity such as a room could have several
tags or beacons located in highly visible places. A tag is a passive device or artefact that
presents the URL when the user places their device’s sensor near it. For example, a
camera phone could in principle perform optical character recognition against the URL
written on a sign, or it could read the URL encoded in a two-dimensional barcode. A
beacon, on the other hand, regularly emits the entity’s URL, typically over (directional)
infrared rather than radio, which is typically omnidirectional and thus can lead to
ambiguity as to which URL belongs to which entity.
In particular, the Cooltown project developed beacons in the form of small devices
(a few centimetres across) that emit a string every few seconds over infrared using a
one-shot, connectionless protocol (Figure 19.13a). The emitted string is an XML-like
document consisting of the URL of the entity’s web presence and a short title. Many
portable devices available at the time of the project, such as mobile phones and PDAs,
had integrated infrared transceivers and so were capable of receiving those strings.
When a client program receives the string, it can, for example, either cause the device’s
browser to go to the received URL directly or create a hyperlink from the received title
to the received URL and add that hyperlink to a list of received hyperlinks, which the
user can click on when they choose.
Indirect sensing: Indirect sensing is where the user’s device obtains an identifier from a
tag or beacon, which is looked up to obtain a URL. The sensing device knows the URL
of a resolver – a name server that maintains a collection of bindings from identifiers to
URLs (a naming context, in the terminology of Chapter 13) and returns the URL bound
to the given identifier [Kindberg 2002]. Ideally, the namespace used for entity identifiers
would be sufficiently large to enable every physical entity to have a unique identifier,
removing the possibility of ambiguity. However, in principle, local identifiers could be
used as long as they were only ever looked up using a local resolver – otherwise,
spurious results might be obtained since someone else might have used the same
identifier for a different entity.
Indirect sensing is sometimes used because constraints in the tag technology mean
that direct URL sensing is impossible. For example, linear barcodes do not have
sufficient capacity to store an arbitrary URL, and cheap RFID tags store only a
fixed-length binary identifier. In each case, the stored identifier has to be looked up to
obtain the web presence’s URL.


===== page 893 =====
SECTION 19.7 CASE STUDY: COOLTOWN 875
Figure 19.13 Capturing and printing the web presence of a painting
painting
beacon
PDA or phone
<link title=“Chop Suey” href= “http..”> <link title=“Chop Suey” href= “http..”>
(a) User captures URL of (b) User sends URL to printer
painting’s web presence using eSquirt, to print
painting’s web presence
But there is also a positive reason to use indirect sensing: it allows a given physical
entity to have a set of web presences instead of just one. Just as the phrase ‘Hopper’s
painting Chop Suey’ could appear in several web pages with each instance linked to a
different web page or respurce, so a given physical painting could lead to different web
presences according to the choice of resolver. For example, one web presence of the
painting could be a link to a service that prints a copy on a nearby printer in the museum;
another web presence for the same painting could be a page providing information about
the painting from an independent third party with no connection to the museum.
The implementation of resolution follows the web architecture in that each
resolver is an independent web site. The client software is a browser augmented by a
simple plug-in. Resolvers provide web forms that contain a field that the client fills in
as a side-effect of sensing, rather than presenting the field to the user for manual entry.
When the user, say, scans a barcode, the resultant identifier is automatically filled into
the form and the client posts the form to the resolver. The resolver returns the
corresponding URL, if one exists.
Since resolvers are themselvesweb resources, the user navigates to them as they
would any other web page [Kindberg 2002] and updates the client with which resolver
it is to use. In particular, the user may pick up the URL of a local resolver using a local
physical hyperlink. For example, the museum’s administrators could set up Cooltown
beacons emitting the local resolver’s URL, so that the visitors could use that resolver to
obtain locally relevant web presences for the paintings within the museum. Equally, if
the identifiers of the paintings are well known and globally established, then the visitors
could utilize other resolvers anywhere on the Web – for example, a Spanish visitor might
utilize the bookmarked resolver of a Spanish art commentary site while visiting a
museum in North America.
Finally, although we have pointed out some advantages of indirect sensing over
direct sensing, it does have a disadvantage: the client must make an extra round-trip to
a resolver, which has consequences in terms of latency and energy consumption.
19.7.3 Interoperation and the ‘eSquirt’ protocol
One method for interoperation between a web-present target device and the user’s
portable device is to use standard web protocols. The user’s portable device issues an


===== page 894 =====
876 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
HTTP GET or POST operation and the target device responds with a user interface in
the form of a web page, which the portable device renders for the user. Returning to a
previous example, a web-present Internet radio can present the URL of its web service
via a beacon facing out to its users. The user walks in front of the radio and points the
infrared receiver on their portable device – say, their PDA – at it; the client on their PDA
receives the URL from the radio and passes the URL to its browser. The result is that the
radio’s ‘home’ page appears on the PDA, with controls to adjust its volume, upload and
play sound files on the PDA, etc.
A web-present printer in a museum could behave similarly. The user obtains the
printer’s home page via its beacon, and thus can upload content to the printer and specify
the printer’s settings via the web page. Of course, devices such as printers may have
physical user interfaces; but simpler appliances such as digital picture frames may not,
and a virtual user interface is then essential.
The above form of interoperation is data-oriented and thus device-independent,
like the Web in general. Since the target device provides its own user interface, a user
can control the device through their browser without requiring target-specific software.
For example, a user with an image file on their PDA can render it on an arbitrary
image-rendering device, whether it be a printer or a digital picture frame, say; and a user
with a sound file on their PDA can hear it on an arbitrary audio-consuming device,
whether it be, for example, an Internet radio or a ‘smart’ HiFi system.
A problem with those scenarios is that the user’s relatively resource-poor portable
device, which may have a low-bandwidth wireless connection, is in the content pathway
between the content’s source and sink. Suppose that the user has obtained an image of a
painting in a Cooltown-enhanced museum, or has obtained an audio clip of someone
talking about the painting. In each case, the adaptation techniques discussed in Section
19.6 may have been applied because of limited resources such as screen size and
bandwidth, resulting in somewhat low fidelity versions of the image or sound clip on the
portable device. When the user passes the image to a printer in the museum, or the sound
clip to the Internet radio in their hotel room, they will be presented with low-quality
versions even though those devices are capable of high-quality rendering and may have
a high-bandwidth wired network connection.
Cooltown’s eSquirt protocol for interoperation between devices removes the
low-fidelity problem – and avoids precious bandwidth and energy consumption – by
passing the URL of the content from one device to another, instead of the content itself.
In fact, the protocol is identical to the one used to send a URL (and title) from a
Cooltown beacon to a device over infrared (Figure 19.13b). The devices pass that small
amount of data over the low-energy infrared medium, and that is the only network
operation in which each device is involved during the eSquirt protocol itself. However,
the recipient device can then act as a web client to retrieve the content using the URL,
and perform an operation such as rendering the resultant data.
For example, a user who has obtained the URL of an image of a Hopper painting
from a beacon beside the painting sends that URL to a printer using their eSquirt-capable
PDA. The protocol that eSquirt uses is unreliable but, as with a TV remote control, if
transmission fails the user can simply press the ‘squirt’ button again until feedback at
the printer confirms success. The printer (rather, the printing service, which may be
implemented in the infrastructure) then acts as a web client to retrieve the content from
the URL – in its full-fidelity form – and prints it.


===== page 895 =====
SECTION 19.7 CASE STUDY: COOLTOWN 877
The user’s portable device thus can act like a device-independent clipboard for
URLs, similar to an application-independent clipboard for data in copy-and-paste
operations on a desktop user interface. The user employs the device to ‘copy and paste’
URLs between sources and sinks to transfer content between them.
Device independence is the most important advantage of the eSquirt paradigm.
The eSquirt protocol always works the same way; what differs is the processing of the
URL by the recipient. However, the user has to have a reasonable idea of what
combinations of squirted URLs and receiving devices make sense. The receiving
device’s designer must also expect some mistakes: a user may mistakenly squirt a URL
of an audio file into a printer. However, it is inadvisable to design away such mistakes
in advance. The prevention measures, such as type-checking, may lead to the
phenomena of lost opportunities and brittle interoperation that we identified in Section
19.2.2.
While simplicity is a strength of the eSquirt protocol, a disadvantage is that it
relies on using default settings in the recipient device, or using physical controls to input
its settings. That is, eSquirt does not enable the interoperation paradigm with which we
began this subsection, in which a client device obtains a virtual user interface for
controlling the settings of a target device. For example, after squirting the URL of a
sound file or a streaming radio station to an Internet radio, how does the user control the
volume from their portable device? Exercise 19.19 explores this issue.
19.7.4 Summary and perspective
We have outlined the main features of the Cooltown architecture. The goal of that
project was to benefit nomadic users by extending the Web, a virtual collection of
hyperlinked content, to entities in the physical world, regardless of whether those
entities have electronic functionality of their own. The architecture considered physical
entities, including people, places and things, to be associated with web presences. Next
are the physical hyperlinks – the mechanisms for sensing the web presence’s URL from
a physical entity. The project implemented physical hyperlinks using infrared beacons,
tags such as barcodes and RFID tags, and resolvers to turn identifiers into URLs.
Support for infrared has declined with the move from PDAs to smart phones, but support
for reading 2D and 1D barcodes and, in some countries, NFC and its subset RFID, has
increased. Finally, eSquirt is a device-independent interoperation protocol, which
relieves low-powered portable devices from the need to be in the content pathway
between sources and sinks of content.
Cooltown largely achieved its objectives, but only on the assumption that the
human is very much ‘in the loop’. Humans physically discover the services associated
with the entities they encounter, via physical hyperlinks. Humans may also have to
physically register the web presences of tagged non-electronic entities such as music
CDs when they are placed in the context of a web-present place such as a house, so that
they become electronically discoverable there. Finally, humans not only associate their
portable devices to web-present entities by ‘clicking’ on physical hyperlinks but, via the
eSquirt protocol, they bring about device-independent interoperation. The involvement
of the human makes for great flexibility, and eliminates the problem of lost opportunities
for interaction. However, the simple eSquirt interoperation model does not give users
control over what a recipient device does with a URL that they have squirted into it.


===== page 896 =====
878 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
An alternative development would be for automated association and
interoperation of web-present entities. Each physical entity could have an instance of a
uniform type of web presence, which would record details of that entity’s semantics
(perhaps using semantic web technologies), including relationships between that entity
and others – in particular, the relationship between a web-present person or thing and
the web presence of the place that contains them. Thus all web presences within a given
place could discover one another and interoperate. For example, the web presence of the
secretary in a meeting could discover documents within a meeting room that needed to
be printed, discover which members were present, discover a nearby printer and cause
the requisite number of a copies to be printed. Cooltown’s web presence manager
[Debaty and Caswell 2001] made a start at realizing that vision, through uniform
management not just of places but of web-present things and people that have links to
related entities such as the web-present place they are in. For example, when an entity
enters a new place and is registered there, the entity is automatically updated with a link
to the web presence of its new host place. Ideally, entity relationships would all be
programatically established, instead of the limited support available today. But the
complicated semantics of our everyday world make it likely that realizing an application
such as automated meeting support in a practically useful rather than error-prone way is
still a long way off. In the meantime, involving humans in the loop enables progress to
be made.
19.8 Summary
This chapter has presented the main challenges raised by mobile and ubiquitous
computer systems, and rather fewer solutions since not many are available. Most of the
challenges stem from the fact that those systems are volatile, which in turn is largely due
to the fact that they are integrated with our everyday physical world. The systems are
volatile in that the set of users, hardware and software components in a given smart
space is subject to unpredictable change. Components tend to make and break
associations routinely, either as they move from smart space to smart space or because
of failure. Connection bandwidth can vary widely over time. Components can fail as
batteries die or for other reasons. Sections 19.1 to 19.3 discussed those aspects of
volatility in full, and some techniques for associating components and enabling them to
interoperate despite the difficulties of ‘constant change’.
The integration of devices with our physical world involves sensing and context
awareness (Section 19.4), and we described some architectures for processing sensed
data. But there remains a challenge that we might describe as physical fidelity: how
accurately can a system with sensing and computation behave in accordance with the
subtle semantics we humans associate with the physical world in which we live? Does
a ‘context aware phone’ really behave as we would want in inhibiting rings
appropriately as we move between places? Does the web presence of a place such as a
hotel room in Cooltown actually record all the web-present entities that a human would
say were in that place – and not, for example, some in an adjacent room?
Security and privacy (Section 19.5) feature strongly in research on mobile and
ubiquitous systems. Volatility complicates security because it begs the question of what


===== page 897 =====
EXERCISES 879
basis there can be for trust between components that wish to establish a secure channel.
Fortunately, the existence of physically constrained channels goes some way to enabling
secure channels where there is a human present. Physical integration has implications
for privacy: if the user is being tracked to provide them with context-aware services,
then there may be a severe loss of privacy. We described some approaches to identifier
management and outlined statistical techniques aimed at reducing that problem.
Physical integration also means new degrees of constraint in terms of such factors
as device energy capacity, wireless bandwidth and user interfaces – a node in a sensor
network has little of the first two and none of the last; a mobile phone has more of all
three, but still much less than a desktop machine. Section 19.6 discussed some of the
architectures by which components can adapt to resource constraints.
Section 19.7 described the architecture of the Cooltown project as a case study.
The architecture is distinctive in that it applies lessons learned from the Web to
ubiquitous computing. The advantage is a high degree of interoperability. But as a result,
the Cooltown design applies mainly to situations in which humans supervise
interactions.
Finally, this chapter has concentrated on the differences between mobile and
ubiquitous systems and the more conventional distributed systems that appear elsewhere
in this book – largely to do with aspects of volatility and physical integration. Exercise
19.20 invites the reader to list some of the similarities, and to consider the extent to
which conventional distributed systems solutions apply to mobile and ubiquitous
systems.
EXERCISES
19.1 What is a volatile system? List the main types of changes that occur in a ubiquitous
system. page 821
19.2 Discuss whether it is possible to improve upon the ‘pull’ model of service discovery by
multicasting (or broadcasting) and caching replies to queries. page 831
19.3 Explain the use of leases in a discovery service to cope with the problem of service
volatility. page 831
19.4 The Jini lookup service matches service offers to client requests based on attributes or
on Java typing. Explain with examples the difference between these two methods of
matching. What is the advantage of allowing both sorts of matching? page 832
19.5 Describe the use of IP multicast and group names in the Jini ‘discovery’ service, which
allows clients and servers to locate lookup servers. page 832
19.6 What is data-oriented programming and how does it differ from object-oriented
programming? page 837
19.7 Discuss the issue of how the scope of an event system can and should be related to the
physical extent of a smart space in which it is used. page 838
19.8 Compare and contrast the persistence requirements associated with event systems and
tuple spaces in the infrastructure of smart spaces. page 840


===== page 898 =====
880 CHAPTER 19 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
19.9 Describe three ways of sensing the presence of a user beside a display and thus motivate
some features required in an architecture for context-aware systems. page 844
19.10 Explain and motivate in-network processing for wireless sensor networks. page 849
19.11 In the Active Bat location system, only three ultrasound receivers are used by default to
obtain a 3D position, whereas four satellites are required to obtain a 3D position in
satellite navigation. Why is there a difference? page 854
19.12 In some location systems, tracked objects give up their identifiers to the infrastructure.
Explain how this may give rise to concerns about privacy, even if the identifiers are
anonymous. page 856
19.13 Many sensor nodes are to be scattered throughout a region. The nodes are to
communicate securely. Explain the problem of key distribution and outline a
probabilistic strategy for distributing keys. page 858
19.14 We described several technologies that provide receive-constrained channels for use in
secure spontaneous device association. Which of those technologies also provide
send-constrained channels? page 861
19.15 Show how to construct a send-constrained channel from a receive-constrained channel,
and vice versa. Hint: use a trusted node connected to the given channel. page 861
19.16 A group of smart spaces are connected only by a space between them. such as a hallway
or square. Discuss the factors that determine whether that intervening space can act as a
mix zone. page 865
19.17 Explain the contextual factors to be taken into account when adapting multimedia
content. page 866
19.18 Assume that a device can execute 3 million instructions for the same amount of energy
(3J) used to transmit or receive 1kbit of data a distance of 100 m by radio. The device
has the option of sending a 100-kbyte binary program to a compute server 100 m away,
which when run will execute 60 billion instructions and exchange 10,000 x 1 kbit
messages with the device. If energy is the only consideration, should the device offload
the computation or execute it itself? Assume computation on the device is negligible in
the offloaded case. page 869
19.19 A Cooltown user squirts the URL of a sound file or a streaming radio station to an
Internet radio. Suggest a modification to the eSquirt protocol that would enable the user
to control the volume from their portable device. Hint: consider what extra data the
squirting device should provide. page 877
19.20 Discuss the applicability to mobile and ubiquitous systems of techniques drawn from the
areas of:
i) peer-to-peer systems (Chapter 10);
ii) coordination and agreement protocols (Chapter 15);
iii) replication (Chapter 18). page 879


===== page 899 =====
20
DISTRIBUTED(cid:3)
MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
20.1 Introduction
20.2 Characteristics of multimedia data
20.3 Quality of service management
20.4 Resource management
20.5 Stream adaptation
20.6 Case studies: Tiger, BitTorrent and End System Multicast
20.7 Summary
Multimedia applications generate and consume continuous streams of data in real time.
They contain large quantities of audio, video and other time-based data elements, and the
timely processing and delivery of the individual data elements (audio samples, video
frames) is essential. Elements delivered late are of no value and are normally dropped.
A flow specification for a multimedia stream is expressed in terms of acceptable
values for the rate at which data passes from a source to a destination (the bandwidth),
the delivery delay for each element (latency) and the rate at which elements are lost or
dropped. The latency is particularly important in interactive applications. Some small
degree of data loss from multimedia streams is often acceptable provided that the
application can resynchronize the elements following those that are lost.
The planned allocation and scheduling of resources to meet the needs of multimedia
and other applications is referred to as quality of service management. The allocation of
processing capacity, network bandwidth and memory (for the buffering of data elements
that are delivered early) are all important. They are allocated in response to quality of
service requests from applications. A successful QoS request delivers a QoS guarantee to
the application and results in the reservation and subsequent scheduling of the resources
requested.
This chapter draws substantially on a tutorial paper by Ralf Herrtwich [1995] and we are grateful to him for
permission to use his material.
881


===== page 900 =====
882 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
20.1 Introduction
Modern computers can handle streams of continuous, time-based data such as digital
audio and video. This capability has led to the development of distributed multimedia
applications such as networked video libraries, Internet telephony and video
conferencing. Such applications are viable with current general-purpose networks and
systems, although the quality of the resulting audio and video is often less than
satisfactory. More demanding applications such as large-scale video conferencing,
digital TV production, interactive TV and video surveillance systems are beyond the
capabilities of current networking and distributed system technologies.
Multimedia applications demand the timely delivery of streams of multimedia
data to end users. Audio and video streams are generated and consumed in real time, and
the timely delivery of the individual elements (audio samples, video frames) is essential
to the integrity of the application. In short, multimedia systems are real-time systems:
they must perform tasks and deliver results according to a schedule that is externally
determined. The degree to which this is achieved by the underlying system is known as
thequality of service (QoS) enjoyed by an application.
Although the problems of real-time system design had been studied before the
advent of multimedia systems, and many successful real-time systems were developed
(see, for example, Kopetz and Verissimo [1993]), they have not generally been
integrated into more general-purpose operating systems and networks. The nature of the
tasks performed by these existing real-time systems, such as avionics, air traffic control,
manufacturing process control and telephone switching, differs from those performed in
multimedia applications. The former generally deal with relatively small quantities of
data and have relatively infrequent hard deadlines, but failure to meet any deadline can
have serious or even disastrous consequences. In such cases, the solution adopted has
been to over-specify the computing resources and to allocate them on a fixed schedule
that ensures that worst-case requirements are always met. This type of solution is not
available for most Internet multimedia streaming applications on desktop computers,
resulting in a ‘best-effort’ quality of service using the available resources.
The planned allocation and scheduling of resources to meet the needs of
multimedia and other applications is referred to as quality of service management. Most
current operating systems and networks do not include the QoS management facilities
needed for a guaranteed quality of service for multimedia applications.
The consequences of failure to meet deadlines in multimedia applications can be
serious, especially in commercial environments such as video-on-demand services,
business conferencing applications and remote medicine, but the requirements differ
significantly from those of other real-time applications:
(cid:129) Multimedia applications are often highly distributed and operate within general-
purpose distributed computing environments. They therefore compete with other
distributed applications for network bandwidth and for computing resources at
users’ workstations and servers.
(cid:129) The resource requirements of multimedia applications are dynamic. A video
conference will require more or less network bandwidth as the number of
participants grows or shrinks. Its use of computing resources at each user’s


===== page 901 =====
SECTION 20.1 INTRODUCTION 883
Figure 20.1 A distributed multimedia system
Video camera
and mike
Local network Local network
Wide area gateway Video Digital
server TV/radio
server
workstation will also vary, since, for example, the number of video streams that
have to be displayed varies. Multimedia applications may involve other variable
or intermittent loads as well. For example, a networked multimedia lecture might
include a processor-intensive simulation activity.
(cid:129) Users often wish to balance the resource costs of a multimedia application with
other activities. Thus they may be willing to reduce their demands for video
bandwidth in a conferencing application in order to allow a separate voice
conversation to proceed, or they may wish a program development or word-
processing activity to proceed while they are participating in a conference.
QoS management systems are intended to meet all of these needs, managing the
available resources dynamically and varying the allocations in response to changing
demands and user priorities. A QoS management system must manage all of the
computing and communication resources needed to acquire, process and transmit
multimedia data streams, especially where the resources are shared between
applications.
Figure 20.1 illustrates a typical distributed multimedia system capable of
supporting a variety of applications, such as desktop conferencing or providing access
to stored video sequences, broadcast digital TV and radio. The resources for which QoS
management is required include network bandwidth, processor cycles and memory
capacity. Disk bandwidth at the video server may also be included. We shall adopt the
generic term resource bandwidth to refer to the capacity of any hardware resource
(network, central processor, disk subsystem) to transmit or process multimedia data.


===== page 902 =====
884 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
In an open distributed system, multimedia applications can be started up and used
without prior arrangement. Several applications may coexist in the same network and
even on the same workstation. The need for QoS management therefore arises
regardless of the total quantity of resource bandwidth or memory capacity in the system.
QoS management is needed in order to guarantee that applications will be able to obtain
the necessary quantity of resources at the required times, even when other applications
are competing for the resources.
Some multimedia applications have been deployed even in today’s QoS-less, best-
efforts computing and network environments. These include:
Web-based multimedia: These are applications that provide best-efforts quality of
service for access to streams of audio and video data published via the Web. They
have been successful when there is little or no need for the synchronization of the data
streams at different locations. Their performance varies with the bandwidth and
latencies in networks and is hampered by the inability of current operating systems
to support real-time resource scheduling. Nevertheless, applications such as
YouTube,Hulu and BBC iPlayer provide an effective and popular demonstration of
the feasibility of streamed multimedia playback on lightly loaded personal
computers. They exploit extensive buffering at the destination to smooth out the
variations in bandwidth and latency and they achieve continuous smooth playback of
high quality audio and medium-resolution video sequences, although with a source-
to-destination delay that may reach several seconds.
Video-on-demand services: These services supply video information in digital form,
retrieving the data from large online storage systems and delivering them to the end
user’s display. They are successful where sufficient dedicated network bandwidth is
available and where the video server and the receiving stations are dedicated. They
also employ considerable buffering at the destination.
Highly interactive applications pose much greater problems. Many multimedia
applications are cooperative (involving several users) and synchronous (requiring the
users’ activities to be closely coordinated). They span a wide spectrum of application
contexts and scenarios. For example:
(cid:129) Internet telephony. See the box on the next page.
(cid:129) A simple video conference involving two or more users, each using a workstation
equipped with a digital video camera, microphone, sound output and video
display capability. Application software to support simple teleconferencing
emerged more than a decade ago ( CU-SeeMe [Dorcey 1995]) and is now widely
deployed (for example: Skype, NetMeeting [www.microsoft.com III], iChat AV
[www.apple.com II]).
(cid:129) A music rehearsal and performance
facility enabling musicians at different
locations to perform in an ensemble
[Konstantas et al. 1997]. This is a
particularly demanding multimedia
application because the synchronization
constraints are so tight.


===== page 903 =====
SECTION 20.1 INTRODUCTION 885
Applications such as these require:
Low-latency communication: Round-trip delays should not exceed 100–300 ms, so
that interaction between users appears to be synchronous.
Synchronous distributed state: If one user stops a video on a given frame, the other
usersshould see it stopped at the same frame.
Media synchronization: All participants in a music performance should hear the
performance at approximately the same time (Konstantas et al. [1997] identified a
requirement for synchronization within 50 ms). Separate soundtrack and video
streams should maintain ‘lip sync’, e.g., for a user commenting live on a video
playback or a distributed karaoke session.
External synchronization: In conferencing and other cooperative applications, there
may be active data in other formats, such as computer-generated animations, CAD
data, electronic whiteboards and shared documents. Updates to these must be
distributed and acted upon in a manner that appears at least approximately
synchronized with the time-based multimedia streams.
Internet telephony – VoIP
The Internet was not designed for real-time interactive applications such as
telephony, but it has become possible to use it for that purpose as a result of the
increases in the capacity and performance of the Internet’s core components – its
backbone of network links run at 10–40 Gbps and the routers that interconnect them
have comparable performance. These components typically run at low load factors
(< 10% bandwidth utilization) and IP traffic is therefore seldom delayed or dropped
as a result of contention for resources.
This has resulted in the feasibility of building telephony applications over the
public Internet by transmitting streams of digitized voice samples from source to
destination as UDP packets with no special provision for quality of service. Voice
over IP (VoIP) applications such as Skype and Vonage rely on this technique, as do
the voice features of instant-messaging applications such as AOL Instant Messaging,
Apple iChat AV and Microsoft NetMeeting.
Of course, these are real-time interactive applications, and latency remains an
issue. As discussed in Chapter 3, the routing of IP packets incurs an inevitable delay
at each router they pass through. For long routes these delays can easily total in
excess of 150 ms, and users will observe this in the form of delays in conversational
interaction. For this reason, long-distance (especially intercontinental) Internet
telephone calls suffer from delays to a much greater extent than those using the
conventional telephone network.
Nevertheless, much voice traffic is carried on the Internet and integration with
the conventional telephone network is underway. The Session Initiation Protocol
(SIP, defined in RFC 2543 [Handley et al. 1999]) is an application-level protocol for
the establishment of voice calls (as well as other services such as instant messaging)
over the Internet. Gateways to the conventional telephone network exist in many
locations throughout the world, enabling calls to be initiated from Internet-connected
devices that are routed over the Internet and terminate at conventional telephones or
personal computers.


===== page 904 =====
886 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
Figure 20.2 Characteristics of typical multimedia streams
Data rate Sample or frame
(approximate) size frequency
Telephone speech 64 kbps 8 bits 8000/sec
CD-quality sound 1.4 Mbps 16 bits 44,000/sec
Standard TV video (uncompressed) 120 Mbps up to 640 (cid:117) 480 24/sec
pixels (cid:117) 16 bits
Standard TV video (MPEG-1 compression) 1.5 Mbps variable 24/sec
HDTV video (uncompressed) 1000–3000 Mbps up to 1920 (cid:117) 1080 24–60/sec
pixels (cid:117) 24 bits
HDTV video(cid:3) 6–20 Mbps variable 24–60/sec
(MPEG-2/MPEG-4 compression)
In Section 20.2 we review the characteristics of multimedia data. Section 20.3 describes
approaches to the allocation of scarce resources in order to achieve QoS, and Section
20.4 discusses methods for scheduling them. Section 20.5 discusses methods for
optimizing the flow of data in multimedia systems. Section 20.6 describes three case
studies of multimedia systems: the Tiger video file server, a low-cost scalable system
for the delivery of stored video streams to large numbers of clients concurrently;
BitTorrent as an example of a peer-to-peer file-sharing application supporting the
downloading of large multimedia files; and CMU’s End System Multicast as an example
of a system supporting broadcasting of video content over the Internet.
20.2 Characteristics of multimedia data
We have referred to video and audio data as continuous and time-based. How can we
define these characteristics more precisely? The term ‘continuous’ refers to the user’s
view of the data. Internally, continuous media are represented as sequences of discrete
values that replace each other over time. For example, the value of an image array is
replaced 25 times per second to give the impression of a TV-quality view of a moving
scene; a sound amplitude value is replaced 8000 times per second to convey telephone-
quality speech.
Multimedia streams are said to be time-based (or isochronous) because timed data
elements in audio and video streams define the semantics or ‘content’ of the stream. The
times at which the values are played or recorded affect the validity of the data. Hence
systems that support multimedia applications need to preserve the timing when they
handle continuous data.


===== page 905 =====
SECTION 20.3 QUALITY OF SERVICE MANAGEMENT 887
Multimedia streams are often bulky. Hence systems that support multimedia
applications need to move data with greater throughput than conventional systems.
Figure 20.2 shows some typical data rates and frame/sample frequencies. We note that
the resource bandwidth requirements for some are very large. This is especially so for
video of reasonable quality. For example, an uncompressed standard TV video stream
requires more than 120 Mbps, which exceeds the capacity of a 100-Mbps Ethernet
network. A program that copies or applies a simple data transformation to each frame of
a standard TV video stream requires less than 10% of the CPU capacity of a PC. The
figures for high-definition television streams are higher, and we should note that in
many applications, such as video conferencing, there is a need to handle multiple video
and audio streams concurrently. The use of compressed representations to overcome
these problems is therefore essential, although transformations such as video mixing and
editing are difficult to accomplish with compressed streams.
Compression can reduce bandwidth requirements by factors of between 10 and
100, but the timing requirements of continuous data are unaffected. There is intensive
research and standardization activity aimed at producing efficient, general-purpose
representations and compression methods for multimedia data streams. This work has
resulted in various compressed data formats, such as GIF, TIFF and JPEG for still
images and MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 for video sequences.
Although the use of compressed video and audio data reduces bandwidth
requirements in communication networks, it imposes substantial additional loads on
processing resources at the source and destination. This need has often been met through
the use of special-purpose hardware to process and dispatch video and audio
information, i.e., the video and audio coders/decoders (codecs) found on video cards
manufactured for personal computers. But the increasing power of personal computers
and multiprocessor architectures now enable them to perform much of this work in
software using software coding and decoding filters. This approach offers greater
flexibility, with better support for application-specific data formats, special-purpose
application logic and the simultaneous handling of multiple media streams.
The compression method used for the MPEG video formats is asymmetric, with a
complex compression algorithm and simpler decompression. This tends to help its use
in desktop conferencing, where compression is often performed by a hardware codec but
decompression of the several streams arriving at each user’s computer is performed in
software, enabling the number of conference participants to vary without regard to the
number of codecs in each user’s computer.
20.3 Quality of service management
When multimedia applications run in networks of personal computers, they compete for
resources at the workstations running the applications (processor cycles, bus cycles,
buffer capacity) and in the networks (physical transmission links, switches, gateways).
Workstations and networks may have to support several multimedia and conventional
applications. There is competition between the multimedia and conventional
applications, between different multimedia applications and even between the media
streams within individual applications.


===== page 906 =====
888 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
Figure 20.3 Typical infrastructure components for multimedia applications
PC/workstation PC/workstation
Windowsystem
Camera H
A K G
Codec Codec
B L
Microphones
Mixer
Network
C connections
Screen Video
Videofilesystem
store
D M
Codec
Windowsystem
: multimediastream
White boxes represent media processing components, (cid:3)
many of which are implemented in software, including: codec: coding/decoding filter(cid:3)
mixer: sound-mixing component
The concurrent use of physical resources for a variety of tasks has long been
possible with multitasking operating systems and shared networks. In multitasking
operating systems, the central processor is allocated to individual tasks (or processes) in
a round-robin or other scheduling scheme that shares the processing resources on a best-
effort basis among all of the tasks currently competing for the central processor.
Networks are designed to enable messages from different sources to be
interleaved, allowing many virtual communication channels to exist on the same
physical channels. The predominant local area network technology, Ethernet, manages
a shared transmission medium in a best-effort manner. Any node may use the medium
when it is quiet, but packet collisions can occur, and when they do sending nodes wait
for random backoff periods in order to prevent repeated collisions. Collisions are likely
to occur when the network is heavily loaded, and this scheme cannot provide any
guarantees regarding the bandwidth or latency in such situations.
The key feature of these resource-sallocation schemes is that they handle increases
in demand by spreading the available resources more thinly between the competing
tasks. Round-robin and other best-efforts methods for sharing processor cycles and
network bandwidth cannot meet the needs of multimedia applications. As we have seen,
the timely processing and transmission of multimedia streams is crucial for them. Late
delivery is valueless. In order to achieve timely delivery, applications need guarantees
that the necessary resources will be allocated and scheduled at the required times.
The management and allocation of resources to provide such guarantees is
referred to as quality of service management. Figure 20.3 shows the infrastructure


===== page 907 =====
SECTION 20.3 QUALITY OF SERVICE MANAGEMENT 889
Figure 20.4 QoS specifications for components of the application shown in Figure 20.3
Component Bandwidth Latency Loss rate Resources required
Camera Out: 10 frames/sec, raw video(cid:3) – Zero –
640x480x16 bits
A Codec In: 10 frames/sec, raw video Interactive Low 10 ms CPU each 100 ms;
Out: MPEG-1 stream 10 Mbytes RAM
B Mixer In: 2(cid:117) 44 kbps audio Interactive Very low 1 ms CPU each 100 ms;
Out: 1(cid:117) 44 kbps audio 1 Mbytes RAM
H Window(cid:3) In: Various Interactive Low 5 ms CPU each 100 ms;
system Out: 50 frame/sec framebuffer 5 Mbytes RAM
K Network(cid:3) In/Out: MPEG-1 stream, (cid:3) Interactive Low 1.5 Mbps, low-loss(cid:3)
connection approx. 1.5 Mbps stream protocol
L Network(cid:3) In/Out: Audio 44 kbps Interactive Very low 44 kbps, very low-loss(cid:3)
connection stream protocol
components for a simple multimedia conferencing application running on two personal
computers, using software data compression and format conversion. The white boxes
represent software components whose resource requirements may affect the quality of
service of the application.
The figure shows the most commonly used abstract architecture for multimedia
software, in which continuously flowing streams of media data elements (video frames,
audio samples) are processed by a collection of processes and transferred between the
processes by interprocess connections. The processes produce, transform and consume
continuous streams of multimedia data. The connections link the processes in a
sequence from a source of media elements to a target, at which it is rendered or
consumed. The connections between the processes may be implemented by networked
connections or by in-memory transfers when processes reside on the same machine. For
the elements of multimedia data to arrive at their target on time, each process must be
allocated adequate CPU time, memory capacity and network bandwidth to perform its
designated task and must be scheduled to use the resources sufficiently frequently to
enable it to deliver the data elements in its stream to the next process on time.
In Figure 20.4, we set out resource requirements for the main software components
and network connections in Figure 20.3 (note the corresponding letters against
components in these two figures). Clearly, the required resources can be guaranteed only
if there is a system component responsible for the allocation and scheduling of those
resources. We shall refer to that component as the quality of service manager.
Figure 20.5 shows the QoS manager’s responsibilities in the form of a flowchart.
In the next two subsections we describe the QoS manager’s two main subtasks:
Quality of service negotiation: The application indicates its resource requirements
to the QoS manager. The QoS manager evaluates the feasibility of meeting the
requirements against a database of the available resources and current resource


===== page 908 =====
890 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
commitments and gives a positive or negative response. If it is negative, the
application may be reconfigured to use reduced resources, and the process is repeated.
Admission control: If the result of the resource evaluation is positive, the requested
resources are reserved and the application is given a resource contract, stating the
resources that have been reserved. The contract includes a time limit. The application
is then free to run. If it changes its resource requirements it must notify the QoS
manager. If the requirements decrease, the resources released are returned to the
database as available resources. If they increase, a new round of negotiation and
admission control is initiated.
In the remainder of this section we describe techniques for performing these subtasks in
further detail. Of course, while an application is running, there is a need for fine-grained
scheduling of resources such as processor time and network bandwidth to ensure that
real-time processes receive their allocated resources on time. Techniques for this are
discussed in Section 20.4.
20.3.1 Quality of service negotiation
To negotiate QoS between an application and its underlying system, the application
must specify its QoS requirements to the QoS manager. This is done by the transmission
of a set of parameters. Three parameters are of primary interest when it comes to
processing and transporting multimedia streams:
Bandwidth: The bandwidth of a multimedia stream or component is the rate at which
data flows through it.
Latency: Latency is the time required for an individual data element to move through
a stream from the source to the destination.This may vary depending on the volume
of other data in the system and other characteristics of the system load. This variation
is termed jitter – formally, jitter is the first derivative of the latency.
Loss rate: Since the late delivery of multimedia data is of no value, data elements
will be dropped when it is impossible to deliver them before their scheduled delivery
time. In a perfectly managed QoS environment, this should never happen, but as yet
few such environments exist, for reasons outlined earlier. Furthermore, the resource
cost of guaranteeing on-time delivery for every media element is often unacceptable
– it is likely to involve the reservation of resources far exceeding the average
requirement in order to deal with occasional peaks. The alternative that is adopted is
to accept a certain rate of data loss – i.e., dropped video frames or audio samples. The
acceptable ratios are usually kept low – seldom more than 1% and much lower for
quality-critical applications.
The three parameters can be used:
1. To describe the characteristics of a multimedia stream in a particular environment.
For example, a video stream may require an average bandwidth of 1.5 Mbps, and
because it is used in a conferencing application it needs to be transferred with at
most 150 ms delay to avoid conversation gaps. The decompression algorithm used
at the target may still yield acceptable pictures with a loss rate of one frame out
of100.


===== page 909 =====
SECTION 20.3 QUALITY OF SERVICE MANAGEMENT 891
Figure 20.5 The QoS manager’s task
Admissioncontrol QoSnegotiation
Application components specify their QoS
requirements to QoS manager
Flow spec.
QoS manager evaluates new requirements against
the available resources.
Sufficient?
Yes No
Reserve the requested resources Negotiate reduced resource provision with application.
Agreement?
Resource contract
Yes No
Allow application to proceed
Do not allow application to proceed
Application runs with resources as Application notifies QoS manager of
per-resource contract increased resource requirements
2. To describe the capabilities of resources to transport a stream. For example, a
network may provide connections of 64 kbps bandwidth, its queuing algorithms
may guarantee delays of less than 10 ms and the transmission system may
guarantee a loss rate smaller than 1 in 106.
The parameters are interdependent. For example:
(cid:129) Loss rate in modern systems rarely depends on actual bit errors due to noise or
malfunction; it results from buffer overflow and from time-dependent data
arriving too late. Hence, the larger bandwidth and the lower delay can be, the more
likely is a low loss rate.
(cid:129) The smaller the overall bandwidth of a resource is compared with its load, the
more messages will accumulate in front of it and the larger the buffers for this
accumulation will need to be to avoid loss. The larger the buffers become, the
more likely it is that messages will need to wait for other messages in front of them
to be serviced – that is, the larger the delay will become.
Specifying the QoS parameters for streams • The values of QoS parameters can be
stated explicitly (e.g., for the camera output stream in Figure 20.3 we might require
bandwidth: 50 Mbps, delay: 150 ms, loss: < 1 frame in 103) or implicitly (e.g., the
bandwidth of the input stream to the network connection K is the result of applying
MPEG-1 compression to the camera output).


===== page 910 =====
892 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
But the more usual case is that we need to specify a value and a range of
permissible variation. Here we consider this requirement for each of the parameters:
Bandwidth: Most video compression techniques produce a stream of frames of differing
sizes depending on the original content of the raw video. For MPEG, the average
compression ratio is between 1:50 and 1:100, but this will vary dynamically depending
on content; for example, the required bandwidth will be highest when the content is
changing most rapidly. Because of this, it is often useful to quote QoS parameters as
maximum, minimum or average values, depending on the type of QoS management
regime that will be used.
Another problem that arises in the specification of the bandwidth is the
characterization of burstiness. Consider three streams of 1 Mbps. One stream transfers
a single frame of 1 Mbit every second, the second is an asynchronous stream of
computer-generated animation elements with an average bandwidth of 1 Mbps and the
third sends a 100-bit sound sample every microsecond. Whereas all three streams
require the same bandwidth, their traffic patterns are very different.
One way to take care of irregularities is to define a burst parameter in addition to
rate and frame size. The burst parameter specifies the maximum number of media
elements that may arrive early – that is, before they should arrive according to the
regular arrival rate. The model of linear-bounded arrival processes (LBAP) used in
Anderson [1993] defines the maximum number of messages in a stream during any time
interval t as Rt + B, where R is the rate and B is the maximum size of burst. The
advantage of using this model is that it nicely reflects the characteristics of multimedia
sources: multimedia data read from disks are usually delivered in large blocks, and data
received from networks often arrive in the form of sequences of smaller packets. In this
case, the burst parameter defines the amount of buffer space required to avoid loss.
Latency: Some timing requirements in multimedia result from the stream itself: if a
frame of a stream does not get processed with the same rate at which frames arrive, a
backlog builds up and buffer capacity may be exceeded. If this is to be avoided, a frame
must on average not remain in a buffer for longer than 1/R, where R is the frame rate of
a stream. If backlogs do occur, the number and size of the backlogs will affect the
maximum end-to-end delay of a stream, in addition to the processing and propagation
times.
Other latency requirements arise from the application environment. In
conferencing applications, the need for apparently instantaneous interaction between the
participants makes it necessary to achieve absolute end-to-end delays of no more than
150 ms to avoid problems in the human perception of the conversation, whereas for the
replay of stored video, to ensure a proper system response to commands such as Pause
andStop, the maximum latency should be on the order of 500 ms.
A third consideration for the delivery time of multimedia messages is jitter –
variation in the period between the delivery of two adjacent frames. Whereas most
multimedia devices make sure that they present data at its regular rate without variation,
software presentations (for example, in a software decoder for video frames) need to
take extra care to avoid jitter. Jitter is essentially solved by buffering, but the scope for
jitter removal is limited, because total end-to-end delay is constrained by the
consideration mentioned above. Thus the playback of media sequences also requires
media elements to arrive before fixed deadlines.


===== page 911 =====
SECTION 20.3 QUALITY OF SERVICE MANAGEMENT 893
Figure 20.6 Traffic shaping algorithms
(a) Leaky bucket (b) Token bucket
Token generator
Loss rate: Loss rate is the most difficult QoS parameter to specify. Typical loss rate
values result from probability calculations about overflowing buffers and delayed
messages. These calculations are based either on worst-case assumptions or on standard
distributions. Neither of these is necessarily a good match for practical situations.
However, loss rate specifications are necessary to qualify the bandwidth and latency
parameters: two applications may have the same bandwidth and latency characteristics;
but they will look dramatically different if one application loses every fifth media
element and the other loses only one in a million.
As with bandwidth specifications, where not just the volume of data sent in a time
interval but its distribution over the time interval is important, a loss rate specification
needs to determine the time interval during which to expect a certain level of loss. In
particular, loss rates given for infinite timespans are not useful, as any loss over a short
time may exceed the long-term rate significantly.
Traffic shaping • Traffic shaping is the term used to describe the use of output buffering
to smooth the flow of data elements. The bandwidth parameter of a multimedia stream
typically provides an idealistic approximation of the actual traffic pattern that will occur
when the stream is transmitted. The closer the actual traffic pattern matches the
description, the better a system will be able to handle the traffic, in particular when it
uses scheduling methods that are designed for periodic requests.
The LBAP model of bandwidth variations calls for regulation of the burstiness of
multimedia streams. Any stream can be regulated by inserting a buffer at the source and
by defining a method by which data elements leave the buffer. A good illustration of this
method is the image of a leaky bucket (Figure 20.6a): the bucket can be filled arbitrarily
with water until it is full; through a leak at the bottom of the bucket water will flow
continuously. The leaky bucket algorithm ensures that a stream will never flow with a
rate higher than R. The size of the buffer B defines the maximum burst a stream can incur
without losing elements. B also bounds the time for which an element will remain in the
bucket.
The leaky bucket algorithm completely eliminates bursts. Such elimination is not
always necessary as long as bandwidth is bounded over any time interval. The token
bucket algorithm achieves this while allowing larger bursts to occur when a stream has


===== page 912 =====
894 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
Figure 20.7 The RFC 1363 flow spec
Protocol version
Maximum transmission unit
Token bucket rate
Bandwidth:
Token bucket size
Maximum transmission rate
Minimum delay noticed
Delay:
Maximum delay variation
Loss sensitivity
Loss: Burst loss sensitivity
Loss interval
Quality of service guarantee
been idle for a while (Figure 20.6b). It is a variation of the leaky bucket algorithm in
which tokens to send data are generated at a fixed rate, R. They are collected in a bucket
of size B. Data of size S can be sent only if at least S tokens are in the bucket. The send
process then removes these S tokens. The token bucket algorithm ensures that over any
interval t the amount of data sent is not larger than Rt + B. It is, hence, an implementation
of the LBAP model.
High peaks of size Bcan only occur in a token bucket system when a stream has
been idle for a while. To avoid these bursts, a simple leaky bucket can be placed behind
the token bucket. The flow rate F of this bucket needs to be significantly larger than R
for this scheme to make sense. Its only purpose is to break up really large bursts.
Flow specifications • A collection of QoS parameters is typically known as a flow
specification, or flow spec for short. Several examples of flow specs exist and all are
similar. In Internet RFC 1363 [Partridge 1992], a flow spec is defined as 11 16-bit
numeric values (Figure 20.7), which reflect the QoS parameters discussed above in the
following way:
(cid:129) The maximum transmission unit and maximum transmission rate determine the
maximum bandwidth required by the stream.
(cid:129) The token bucket size and rate determine the burstiness of the stream.
(cid:129) The delay characteristics are specified by the minimum delay that an application
can notice (since we wish to avoid overoptimization for short delays) and the
maximum jitter it can accept.
(cid:129) The loss characteristics are defined by the total number of losses acceptable over
a certain interval and the maximum number of consecutive losses acceptable.


===== page 913 =====
SECTION 20.3 QUALITY OF SERVICE MANAGEMENT 895
There are many alternatives for expressing each parameter group. In SRP [Anderson et
al. 1990], the burstiness of a stream is given by a maximum workahead parameter,
which defines the number of messages a stream may be ahead of its regular arrival rate
at any point in time. In Ferrari and Verma [1990], a worst-case delay bound is given: if
the system cannot guarantee to transport data within this timespan, the data transport
will be useless for the application. In RFC 1190, the specification of the ST-II protocol
[Topolcic 1990], loss is represented as the probability of each packet being dropped.
All the above examples provide a continuous spectrum of QoS values. If the set
of applications and streams to be supported is limited, it may be sufficient to define a
discrete set of QoS classes: for example, telephone-quality and high-fidelity audio, live
and playback video, etc. The requirements of all classes must be implicitly known by all
system components; the system may even be configured for a certain traffic mix.
Negotiation procedures • For distributed multimedia applications, the components of a
stream are likely to be located in several nodes. There will be a QoS manager at each
node. A straightforward approach to QoS negotiation is to follow the flow of data along
each stream from the source to the target. A source component initiates the negotiation
by sending out a flow spec to its local QoS manager. The manager can check against its
database of available resources whether the requested QoS can be provided. If other
systems are involved in the application, the flow spec is forwarded to the next node
where resources are required. The flow spec traverses all the nodes until the final target
is reached. Then the information on whether the desired QoS can be provided by the
system is passed back to the source. This simple approach to negotiation is satisfactory
for many purposes, but it does not consider the possibilities for conflict between
concurrent QoS negotiations starting at different nodes. A distributed transactional QoS
negotiation procedure would be required for a full solution to this problem.
Applications rarely have fixed QoS requirements. Instead of returning a boolean
value indicating whether a certain QoS can be provided or not, it is more appropriate for
the system to determine what kind of QoS it can provide and let the application decide
whether it is acceptable. In order to avoid over-optimized QoS or to abort the negotiation
when it becomes clear that the desired quality is not achievable, it is common to specify
a desired and worst-case value for each QoS parameter. That is, an application may
specify that it desires a bandwidth of 1.5 Mbps but would also be able to handle 1 Mbps,
or that delay should be 200 ms, but 300 ms would be the worst case that is still
acceptable. As only one parameter can be optimized at a time, systems such as HeiRAT
[Vogt et al. 1993] expect the user to define values for only two parameters and leave it
to the system to optimize the third.
If a stream has multiple sinks, the negotiation path forks according to the data
flow. As a straightforward extension to the above scheme, intermediate nodes can
aggregate QoS feedback messages from the targets to produce worst-case values for the
QoS parameters. The available bandwidth then becomes the smallest available
bandwidth of all targets, the delay becomes the longest of all targets, and the loss rate
becomes the largest of all targets. This is the procedure practised by sender-initiated
negotiation protocols such as SRP, ST-II and RCAP [Banerjea and Mah 1991].
In situations with heterogeneous targets, it is usually inappropriate to assign a
common worst-case QoS to all targets. Instead, each target should receive the best
possible QoS. This calls for a receiver-initiated negotiation process rather then a sender-


===== page 914 =====
896 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
oriented one. RSVP [Zhang et al. 1993] is an alternative QoS negotiation protocol in
which targets connect to streams. Sources communicate the existence of streams and
their inherent characteristics to all targets. Targets can then connect to the closest node
through which the stream passes and derive data from there. In order for them to obtain
data with the appropriate QoS, they may need to use techniques such as filtering
(discussed in Section 20.5).
20.3.2 Admission control
Admission control regulates access to resources to avoid resource overload and to
protect resources from requests that they cannot fulfil. It involves turning down service
requests should the resource requirements of a new multimedia stream violate existing
QoS guarantees.
An admission control scheme is based on some knowledge of both the overall
system capacity and the load generated by each application. The bandwidth requirement
specification for an application may reflect the maximum amount of bandwidth that an
application will ever require, the minimum bandwidth it will need to function, or some
average value in between. Correspondingly, an admission control scheme may base its
resource allocation on any of these values.
For resources that have a single allocator, admission control is straightforward.
Resources that have distributed access points, such as many local area networks, require
either a centralized admission control entity or some distributed admission control
algorithm that avoids conflicting concurrent admissions. Bus arbitration within
workstations falls into this category; however, even multimedia systems that perform
bandwidth allocation extensively do not control bus admission, as bus bandwidth is not
considered to be in the window of scarcity.
Bandwidth reservation • A common way to ensure a certain QoS level for a multimedia
stream is to reserve some portion of resource bandwidth for its exclusive use. In order
to fulfil the requirements of a stream at all times, a reservation needs to be made for its
maximum bandwidth. This is the only possible way to provide guaranteed QoS to an
application – at least, as long as no catastrophic system failures occur. It is used for
applications that cannot adapt to different QoS levels or become useless when quality
drops occur. Examples include some medical applications (a symptom may appear in an
x-ray video just at the time when video frames are dropped) and video recording (where
dropped frames will result in a flaw in the recording that is visible every time the video
is played).
Reservation based on maximum requirements can be straightforward: when
controlling access to a network of a certain bandwidth B, multimedia streams s of a
bandwidth b s can be admitted as long as (cid:54)b s <= B. Thus a token ring of 16 Mbps may
support up to 10 digital video streams of 1.5 Mbps each.
Unfortunately, capacity calculations are not always as simple as in the network
case. Allocating CPU bandwidth in the same way requires the execution profile of each
application process to be known. Execution times, however, depend on the processor
used and often cannot be determined precisely. While several proposals for automatic
execution time calculation exist [Mok 1985, Kopetz et al. 1989], none of them has


===== page 915 =====
SECTION 20.4 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 897
achieved widespread use. Execution times are usually determined through measure-
ments that often have wide error margins and limited portability.
For typical media encodings such as MPEG, the actual bandwidth consumed by
an application may be significantly lower than its maximum bandwidth. Reservations
based on maximum requirements may then lead to wasted resource bandwidth: requests
for new admissions are turned down although they could be satisfied with the bandwidth
that is reserved for, but not actually used by existing applications.
Statistical multiplexing • Because of the potential under-utilization that can occur, it is
common to overbook resources. The resulting guarantees, often called statistical or soft
guarantees to distinguish them from the deterministic or hard guarantees introduced
before, are only valid with some (usually very high) probability. Statistical guarantees
tend to provide better resource utilization as they do not consider the worst case. But just
as when resource allocation is based on minimum or average requirements,
simultaneous peak loads can cause drops in service quality; applications have to be able
to handle these drops.
Statistical multiplexing is based on the hypothesis that for a large number of
streams the aggregate bandwidth required remains nearly constant regardless of the
bandwidth of individual streams. It assumes that when one stream sends a large quantity
of data, there will also be another stream that sends a small quantity, and overall the
requirements will balance out. This, however, is only the case for uncorrelated streams.
As experiments show [Leland et al. 1993], multimedia traffic in typical
environments does not obey this hypothesis. Given a larger number of bursty streams,
the aggregate traffic still remains bursty. The term self-similar has been applied to this
phenomenon, meaning that the aggregate traffic shows similarity to the individual
streams of which it is composed.
20.4 Resource management
To provide a certain QoS level to an application, not only does a system need to have
sufficient resources (performance), but it also needs to make these resources available
to an application when they are needed (scheduling).
20.4.1 Resource scheduling
Processes need to have resources assigned to them according to their priority. A resource
scheduler determines the priority of processes based on certain criteria. Traditional CPU
schedulers in time-sharing systems often base their priority assignments on
responsiveness and fairness: I/O-intensive tasks get high priority to guarantee fast
response to user requests, CPU-bound tasks get lower priorities, and overall, processes
in the same class are treated equally.
Both criteria remain valid for multimedia systems, but the existence of deadlines
for the delivery of individual multimedia data elements changes the nature of the
scheduling problem. Real-time scheduling algorithms can be applied to this problem, as
discussed below. As multimedia systems have to handle both discrete and continuous


===== page 916 =====
898 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
media, it becomes a challenge to provide sufficient service to time-dependent streams
without causing starvation of discrete-media access and other interactive applications.
Scheduling methods need to be applied to (and coordinated for) all resources that
affect the performance of a multimedia application. In a typical scenario, a multimedia
stream would be retrieved from disk and then sent through a network to a target station,
where it is synchronized with a stream coming from another source and finally
displayed. The resources required in this example include disk, network and CPU
resources as well as memory and bus bandwidth on all systems involved.
Fair scheduling • If several streams compete for the same resource, it becomes
necessary to consider fairness and to prevent ill-behaved streams taking too much
bandwidth. A straightforward approach ensuring fairness is to apply round-robin
scheduling to all streams in the same class. Whereas in Nagle [1987] such a method was
introduced on a packet-by-packet basis, in Demers et al. [1989] the method is used on a
bit-by-bit basis, which provides more fairness with respect to varying packet sizes and
packet arrival times. These methods are known as fair queuing.
Packets cannot actually be sent on a bit-by-bit basis, but given a certain frame rate
it is possible to calculate for each packet when it should have been sent completely. If
packet transmissions are ordered based on this calculation, one achieves almost the same
behaviour as with actual bit-by-bit round robin, except that when a large packet is sent,
it may block the transmission of a smaller packet, which would have been preferred
under the bit-by-bit scheme. However, no packet is delayed for longer than the
maximum packet transmission time.
All basic round-robin schemes assign the same bandwidth to each stream. To take
the individual bandwidth of streams into account, the bit-by-bit scheme can be extended
so that for certain streams a larger number of bits can be transmitted per cycle. This
method is called weighted fair queuing.
Real-time scheduling • Several real-time scheduling algorithms have been developed
to meet the CPU scheduling needs of applications such as avionics industrial process
control. Assuming that the CPU resources have not been overallocated (which is the task
of the QoS manager), they assign CPU timeslots to a set of processes in a manner that
ensures that they complete their tasks on time.
Traditional real-time scheduling methods suit the model of regular continuous
multimedia streams very well. Earliest-deadline-first (EDF) scheduling has almost
become a synonym for these methods. An EDF scheduler uses a deadline that is
associated with each of its work items to determine the next item to be processed: the
item with the earliest deadline goes first. In multimedia applications, we identify each
media element arriving at a process as a work item. EDF scheduling is proven to be
optimal for allocating a single resource based on timing criteria: if there is a schedule
that fulfils all timing requirements, EDF scheduling will find it [Dertouzos 1974].
EDF scheduling requires one scheduling decision per message (i.e., per
multimedia element). It would be more efficient to base scheduling on elements that
exist for a longer time. Rate-monotonic (RM) scheduling is a prominent technique for
real-time scheduling of periodic processes that achieves just this. Streams are assigned
priorities according to their rate: the higher the rate of work items on a stream, the higher
the priority of a stream. RM scheduling has been shown to be optimal for situations that
utilize a given bandwidth by less than 69% [Liu and Layland 1973]. Using such an


===== page 917 =====
SECTION 20.5 STREAM ADAPTATION 899
allocation scheme, the remaining bandwidth could be given to non-real-time
applications.
To cope with bursty real-time traffic, the basic real-time scheduling methods
should be adjusted to distinguish between time-critical and non-critical continuous-
media work items. In Govindan and Anderson [1991], deadline/workahead scheduling
is introduced. It allows messages in a continuous stream to arrive ahead of time in bursts
but applies EDF scheduling to a message only at its regular arrival time.
20.5 Stream adaptation
Whenever a certain QoS cannot be guaranteed or can be guaranteed only with a certain
probability, an application needs to adapt to changing QoS levels, adjusting its
performance accordingly. For continuous-media streams, the adjustment translates into
different levels of media presentation quality.
The simplest form of adjustment is to drop pieces of information. This is easily
done in audio streams, where samples are independent of each other, but it may be
noticed immediately by the listener. Dropouts in a video stream encoded in Motion
JPEG, where each frame is freestanding, are more tolerable. Encoding mechanisms such
as MPEG, where the interpretation of a frame depends on the values of several adjacent
frames, are less robust against omissions: it takes a longer time to recover from errors,
and the encoding mechanism may in fact amplify errors.
If there is insufficient bandwidth and data is not dropped, the delay of a stream will
increase over time. For non-interactive applications this may be acceptable, although it
can eventually lead to buffer overflows as data is accumulated between the source and
sink. For conferencing and other interactive applications, increasing delays are not
acceptable, or must exist only for a short period. If a stream is behind its assigned
playout time, its playout rate should be increased until it gets back on schedule: while a
stream is delayed, frames should be output as soon as they are available.
20.5.1 Scaling
If adaptation is performed at the target of a stream, the load on any bottleneck in the
system is not decreased and the overload situation persists. It is useful to adapt a stream
to the bandwidth available in the system before it enters a bottleneck resource in order
to resolve contention. This is known as scaling.
Scaling is best applied when live streams are sampled. For stored streams, how
easy it is to generate a downgraded stream depends on the encoding method. Scaling
may be too cumbersome if the entire stream has to be decompressed and encoded again
just for scaling purposes. Scaling algorithms are media-dependent, although the overall
scaling approach is the same: to subsample a given signal. For audio information, such
subsampling can be achieved by reducing the rate of audio sampling. It can also be
achieved by dropping a channel in a stereo transmission. As this example shows,
different scaling methods can work at different granularities.


===== page 918 =====
900 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
Figure 20.8 Filtering
Source
Targets
Highbandwidth
Mediumbandwidth
Lowbandwidth
For video, the following scaling methods are appropriate:
Temporal scaling:Reduces the resolution of the video stream in the time domain by
decreasing the number of video frames transmitted within an interval. Temporal
scaling is best suited to video streams in which individual frames are self-contained
and can be accessed independently. Delta compression techniques are more difficult
to handle as not all frames can easily be dropped. Hence, temporal scaling is more
suitable for Motion JPEG than for MPEG streams.
Spatial scaling:Reduces the number of pixels of each image in a video stream. For
spatial scaling, hierarchical arrangement is ideal because the compressed video is
immediately available in various resolutions. Therefore the video can be transferred
over the network using different resolutions without recoding each picture before
finally transmitting it. JPEG and MPEG-2 support different spatial resolutions of
images and are well suited to this kind of scaling.
Frequency scaling:Modifies the compression algorithm applied to an image. This
results in some loss of quality, but in a typical picture compression can be increased
significantly before a reduction of image quality becomes visible.
Amplitudinal scaling:Reduces the colour depths for each image pixel. This scaling
method is in fact used in H.261 encodings to arrive at a constant throughput as image
content varies.
Colour-space scaling:Reduces the number of entries inthe colour space. One way
to realize colour-space scaling is to switch from colour to greyscale presentation.
Combinations of these scaling methods can be used if necessary.
A system to perform scaling consists of a monitorprocess at the target and a scaler
process at the source. The monitor keeps track of the arrival times of messages in a
stream. Delayed messages are an indication of a bottleneck in the system. The monitor
then sends a scale-down message to the source and the source reduces the bandwidth of
the stream. After some period of time, the source scales the stream up again. Should the
bottleneck still exist, the monitor will again detect a delay and scale the stream down


===== page 919 =====
SECTION 20.6 CASE STUDIES: TIGER, BITTORRENT AND END SYSTEM MULTICAST 901
[Delgrossi et al. 1993]. A problem for the scaling system is to avoid unnecessary scale-
up operations and to prevent the system from oscillating.
20.5.2 Filtering
As scaling modifies a stream at the source, it is not always suitable for applications that
involve several receivers: when a bottleneck occurs on the route to one target, this target
sends a scale-down message to the source and all targets receive the degraded quality,
although some would have no problem in handling the original stream.
Filtering is a method that provides the best possible QoS to each target by applying
scaling at each relevant node on the path from the source to the target (Figure 20.8).
RSVP [Zhang et al. 1993] is an example of a QoS negotiation protocol that supports
filtering. Filtering requires that a stream be partitioned into a set of hierarchical
substreams, each adding a higher level of quality. The capacity of nodes on a path
determines the number of substreams a target receives. All other substreams are filtered
out as close to the source as possible (perhaps even at the source) to avoid transfer of
data that is later thrown away. A substream is not filtered at an intermediate node if
somewhere downstream a path exists that can carry the entire substream.
20.6 Case studies: Tiger, BitTorrent and End System Multicast
As discussed in Chapter 1, multimedia is a key trend in modern distributed systems.
Rather than an area in its own right, multimedia is best considered as pervading all
distributed systems and hence offering challenges that have to be taken into account in
the design of all aspects of distributed systems. In this section, we present case studies
that illustrate how multimedia influences three key areas of distributed system
development:
(cid:129) the design of a distributed file system to support video files (the Tiger video file
server);
(cid:129) the design of a peer-to-peer download system designed to support very large
multimedia files (BitTorrent);
(cid:129) the design of a real-time multicast streaming service (End System Multicast).
Note that we have already seen one other example of a multimedia service when we
examined the overlay network structure adopted by Skype (see Section 4.5.2).
20.6.1 The Tiger video file server
A video storage system that supplies multiple real-time video streams simultaneously is
seen as an important system component to support consumer-oriented multimedia
applications. Several prototype systems of this type have been developed, and some
have evolved into products (see [Cheng 1998]). One of the most advanced of these is the
Tiger video file server developed at the Microsoft Research Labs [Bolosky et al. 1996].


===== page 920 =====
902 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
Figure 20.9 Tiger video file server hardware configuration
Controller
low-bandwidth network
0 n+1 1 n+2 2 n+3 3 n+4 n 2n+1
Cub 0 Cub 1 Cub 2 Cub 3 Cub n
high-bandwidth
ATM switching network
Start/Stop
video distribution to clients requests from clients
Design goals • The following were the main design goals for the system:
Video-on-demand for a large number of users The typical application is a service
that supplies movies to paying clients. The movies are selected from a large stored
digital movie library. Clients should receive the first frames of their selected movies
within a few seconds of issuing a request, and they should be able to perform pause,
rewind and fast-forward operations at will. Although the library of available movies
is large, a few movies may be very popular and they will be the subject of multiple
unsynchronized requests, resulting in several concurrent but time-shifted playings of
them.
Quality of service: Video streams must be supplied at a constant rate with a
maximum jitter that is determined by the (assumed small) amount of buffering
available at the clients and a very low loss rate.
Scalable and distributed: The aim was to design a system with an architecture that
is extensible (by the addition of computers) to support up to 10,000 clients
simultaneously.
Low-cost hardware: The system was to be built using low-cost hardware
(‘commodity’ PCs with standard disk drives).
Fault tolerant: The system should continue to operate without noticeable
degradation after the failure of any single server computer or disk drive.
Taken together, these requirements demand a radical approach to the storage and
retrieval of video data and an effective scheduling algorithm that balances the workload
across a large number of similar servers. The primary task is the transfer of high-
bandwidth streams of video data from disk storage to a network, and it is this load that
has to be shared between the servers.
Architecture • The Tiger hardware architecture is shown in Figure 20.9. All of the
components are off-the-shelf products. The cub computers shown in the figure are


===== page 921 =====
SECTION 20.6 CASE STUDIES: TIGER, BITTORRENT AND END SYSTEM MULTICAST 903
identical PCs with the same number of standard hard disk drives (typically between two
and four) attached to each. They are also equipped with Ethernet and ATM network
cards (see Chapter 3). The controller is another PC. It is not involved in the handling of
multimedia data and is responsible only for the handling of client requests and the
management of the work schedules of the cubs.
Storage organization • The key design issue is the distribution of the video data among
the disks attached to cubs in order to enable them to share the load. Since the load may
involve the supply of multiple streams from the same movie as well as the supply of
streams from many different movies, any solution based on the use of a single disk to
store each movie is unlikely to achieve this goal. Instead, movies are stored in a striped
representation across all disks. This leads to a failure model in which the loss of a disk
or a cub results in a gap in the sequence of every movie. This is dealt with by a storage
mirroring scheme that replicates the data and the fault-tolerance mechanism, described
below.
Striping: A movie is divided into blocks (chunks of video of equal play time, typically
around 1 second, occupying about 0.5 Mbytes), and the set of blocks that make up a
movie (typically about 7000 of them for a two-hour movie) is stored on disks attached
to different cubs in a sequence indicated by the disk numbers shown in Figure 20.9. A
movie can start on any disk. Whenever the highest-numbered disk is reached, the movie
is ‘wrapped around’ so that the next block is stored on disk 0 and the process continues.
Mirroring: The mirroring scheme divides each block into several portions, called
secondaries. This ensures that when a cub fails, the extra workload of supplying data for
blocks on the failed cub falls on several of the remaining cubs and not just one of them.
The number of secondaries per block is determined by a decluster factor,d, with typical
values in the range 4 to 8. The secondaries for a block stored on disk i are stored on disks
i+1 to i+d. Note that, provided that there are more than d cubs, none of these disks is
attached to the same cub as disk i. With a decluster factor of 8, approximately 7/8 of the
processing capacity and disk bandwidth of cubs can be allocated to fault-free tasks. The
remaining 1/8 of its resources should be enough to serve secondaries when needed.
Distributed schedule • The heart of Tiger’s design is the scheduling of the workload for
the cubs. The schedule is organized as a list of slots, where each slot represents the work
that must be done to play one block of a movie – that is, to read it from the relevant disk
and transfer it to the ATM network. There is exactly one slot for each potential client
receiving a movie (called a viewer), and each occupied slot represents one viewer
receiving a real-time video data stream. The viewer state is represented in the schedule
by:
(cid:129) the address of the client computer;
(cid:129) the identity of the file being played;
(cid:129) the viewer’s position in the file (the next block to be delivered in the stream);
(cid:129) the viewer’s play sequence number (from which a delivery time for the next block
can be calculated);
(cid:129) some bookkeeping information.


===== page 922 =====
904 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
Figure 20.10 Tiger schedule
block service
2 1 0
block play time T time t
slot 0 slot 1 slot 2 slot 3 slot 4 slot 5 slot 6 slot 7
viewer 4 free free viewer 0 viewer 3 viewer 2 free viewer 1
state state state state state
The schedule is illustrated in Figure 20.10. The block play time, T, is the time that will
be required for a viewer to display a block on the client computer – this is typically about
1 second and is assumed to be the same for all the stored movies. Tiger must therefore
maintain a time interval T between the delivery times of the blocks in each stream, with
a small allowable jitter that is determined by the available buffering at the client
computers.
Each cub maintains a pointer into the schedule for each disk that it controls.
During each block play time it must process all of the slots with block numbers that fall
on the disks it controls and delivery times that fall within the current block play time.
The cub steps through the schedule in real-time processing slots as follows:
1. Read the next block into buffer storage at the cub.
2. Packetize the block and deliver it to the cub’s ATM network controller with the
address of the client computer.
3. Update viewer state in the schedule to show the new next block and play sequence
number and pass the updated slot to the next cub.
These actions are assumed to occupy a maximum time t, which is known as the block
service time. As can be seen in Figure 20.10,t is substantially less than the block play
time. The value of t is determined by the disk bandwidth or the network bandwidth,
whichever is smaller. (The processing resources in a cub are adequate to perform the
scheduled work for all the attached disks.) When a cub has completed the schedule tasks
for the current block play time it is available for unscheduled tasks until the start of the
next play time. In practice, disks do not provide blocks with a fixed delay, and to
accommodate their uneven delivery the disk read is initiated at least one block service
time before the block is needed for packetizing and delivery.
A disk can handle the work to service T/t streams, and the values of T and t
typically result in a value > 4 for this ratio. This and the number of disks in the entire
system determines the number of viewers that a Tiger system can service. For example,
a Tiger system with five cubs and three disks attached to each can deliver approximately
70 video streams simultaneously.
Fault tolerance • Because of the striping of all the movie files across all of the disks in
a Tiger system, failure of any component (a disk drive or a cub) would result in a
disruption of service to all clients. The Tiger design remedies this by retrieving data


===== page 923 =====
SECTION 20.6 CASE STUDIES: TIGER, BITTORRENT AND END SYSTEM MULTICAST 905
from the mirrored secondary copies when a primary block is unavailable because of the
failure of a cub or a disk drive. Recall that secondary blocks are smaller than primary
blocks in the ratio of the decluster factor d and that the secondaries are distributed so that
they fall on several disks that are attached to different cubs.
When a cub or a disk fails, the schedule is modified by an adjacent cub to show
several mirror viewer states, representing workload for the d disks that hold the
secondaries for those movies. A mirror viewer state is similar to a normal viewer state
but with different block numbers and timing requirements. Because this extra workload
is shared among d disks and d cubs, it can be accommodated without disrupting the tasks
in other slots, provided that there is a small amount of spare capacity in the schedule.
The failure of a cub is equivalent to the failure of all of the disks attached to it and is
handled in a similar manner.
Network support • The blocks of each movie are simply passed to the ATM network by
the cubs that hold them, together with the address of the relevant client. The QoS
guarantees of ATM network protocols are relied upon to deliver blocks to client
computers in sequence and in time. The client needs sufficient buffer storage to hold two
primary blocks; the one that is currently playing on the client’s screen and one that is
arriving from the network. When primary blocks are being served, the client need only
check the sequence number of each arriving block and pass it to the display handler.
When secondaries are being served, the d cubs responsible for a declustered block
deliver their secondaries to the network in sequence, and it is the client’s responsibility
to collect and assemble them in its buffer storage.
Other functions • We have described the time-critical activities of a Tiger server. The
design requirements called for the provision of fast-forward and rewind functions. These
functions call for the delivery of some fraction of the blocks in the movie to the client in
order to give the visual feedback typically provided by video recorders. This is done on
a best-effort basis by the cubs in unscheduled time.
The remaining tasks include managing and distributing the schedule, and
managing the database of movies, deleting old and writing new movies onto the disks
and maintaining an index of movies.
In the initial Tiger implementation, schedule management and distribution were
handled by the controller computer. Because this constitutes a single point of failure and
a potential performance bottleneck, schedule management was subsequently redesigned
as a distributed algorithm [Bolosky et al. 1997]. Management of the movie database is
performed by cubs in unscheduled time in response to commands from the controller.
Performance and scalability • The initial prototype was developed in 1994 and used
five 133-MHz Pentium PCs, each equipped with 48 Mbytes of RAM, three 2-Gbyte
SCSI disk drives and an ATM network controller, running over Windows NT. This
configuration was measured under a simulated client load. When serving movies to 68
clients with no faults in the Tiger system, the delivery of the data was perfect – no blocks
were lost or delivered to clients late. With one cub failed (and hence three disks) the
service was maintained with a data loss rate of only 0.02%, well within the design goal.
Another measurement that was taken was the startup latency to deliver the first
block of a movie after receipt of a client request. This will be highly dependent on the
number and the position of free slots in the schedule. The algorithm used for this initially
would place a client request in the nearest free slot to the disk holding block 0 of the


===== page 924 =====
906 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
requested movie. This resulted in measured values for the startup latency in the range of
2 to 12 seconds. Recent work has resulted in a slot allocation algorithm that reduces
clustering of occupied slots in the schedule, leaving free slots distributed more evenly in
the schedule and improving average startup latency [Douceur and Bolosky 1999].
Although the initial experiments were made with a small configuration, later
measurements were made with a 14-cub, 56-disk configuration and the distributed
scheduling scheme described by Bolosky et al. [1997]. The load that could be serviced
by this system scaled successfully to deliver 602 simultaneous 2-Mbps data streams with
a loss rate of less than one block in 180,000 when all cubs were functioning. With one
cub failed, less than 1 in 40,000 blocks was lost. These results are impressive and appear
to bear out the claim that a Tiger system could be configured with up to 1000 cubs
servicing up to 30,000–40,000 simultaneous viewers.
20.6.2 BitTorrent
BitTorrent [www.bittorrent.com] is a popular peer-to-peer file-sharing application
designed particularly for downloading large files (including video files). It is not
intended for the real-time streaming of content but rather for the initial downloading of
files to be played back later. BitTorrent was mentioned briefly in Chapter 10 as an
example of a peer-to-peer file-sharing protocol. In this chapter, we look in more detail
at the design of BitTorrent with emphasis on the support provided for downloading
video files.
The principal design feature in BitTorrent is the splitting of files into fixed-sized
chunks and the subsequent availability of chunks at various sites across the peer-to-peer
network. Clients can then download a number of chunks in parallel from different sites,
reducing the burden on any one particular site to service the download (remembering
that BitTorrent relies on the capabilities of ordinary user machines and also that there
may be many simultaneous requests for popular files). This compares favourably to
more centralized strategies where a client would download a file from a server using, for
example, HTTP.
In more detail, the BitTorrent protocol operates as follows. When a file is made
available in BitTorrent, a .torrent file is created that holds metadata associated with that
file including:
(cid:129) the name and length of the file;
(cid:129) the location of a tracker (specified as a URL), which is a centralized server that
manages downloads of that particular file;
(cid:129) a checksum associated with each chunk, generated using the SHA-1 hashing
algorithm, that enables content to be verified following download.
The use of trackers is a compromise against pure peer-to-peer principles, but this allows
the system to easily maintain the above information in a centralized manner.
Trackers are responsible for keeping track of the download status associated with
a particular file. To understand the information held by the tracker, it is necessary to
stand back and consider the lifecycle of a given file.
Any peer with a complete version of a file (in terms of all its chunks) is known as
aseeder in BitTorrent terminology. For example, the peer that initially creates the file


===== page 925 =====
SECTION 20.6 CASE STUDIES: TIGER, BITTORRENT AND END SYSTEM MULTICAST 907
Figure 20.11 BitTorrent terminology
Term Meaning
.torrent file A file that maintains metadata about an available file
tracker A server containing information about the downloads in progress
chunk A fixed size portion of a given file
seeder A peer that holds a complete copy of a file (consisting of all its chunks)
leecher A peer involved in downloading a file that currently holds only a portion of
its chunks
torrent (or swarm) A set of sites involved with downloading a file including the tracker, seeders
and leechers
tit-for-tat An incentive mechanism that governs the scheduling of downloads in
BitTorrent
optimistic unchoking A mechanism to allow new peers to establish their credentials
rarest first A scheduling scheme whereby BitTorrent prioritizes frames that are rare
within its set of connected peers
will provide the initial seed for the file distribution. Peers that want to download a file
are known as leechers,and a given leecher at any given time will contain a number of
chunks associated with that file. Once a leecher downloads all the chunks associated
with a file, it can become a seeder for subsequent downloads. In this way, files spread
virally through the network, with the spread stimulated by demand. Based on this, the
tracker maintains information about the current state of downloads of a given file in
terms of the associated seeders and leechers. The tracker together with the associated
seeders and leechers in BitTorrent are referred to as the torrent (or swarm) for that file.
(A summary of BitTorrent terminology can be found in Figure 20.11.)
When a peer wants to download a file, itfirst contacts the tracker and is given a
partial view of the torrent in terms of a set of peers that can support the download. After
that, the job of the tracker is done – it does not get involved in subsequent scheduling of
downloads. This is a matter for the various peers involved and hence this part of the
protocol is decentralized. Chunks are then requested and transmitted to the requesting
peer in any order (compare this to CoolStreaming, as featured in the box on page 910).
BitTorrent, along with many peer-to-peer protocols, relies on peers to behave as
good citizens, contributing to as well as taking from the system. Crucially, the system
has an inbuilt incentive mechanism to reward such cooperation, known as the tit-for-tat
mechanism [Cohen 2003]. Informally, this approach gives preference to downloading
peers who have previously or who are currently uploading to that site. As well as acting
as an incentive mechanism, tit-for-tat also encourages patterns of communication where
downloading and uploading proceed concurrently, making optimum use of bandwidth.
In more detail, a given peer supports downloading from n simultaneous peers by
unchoking these peers. Decisions of which peers to unchoke are based on rolling
calculations of download rates from these peers with this decision revisited every 10


===== page 926 =====
908 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
seconds. The algorithm also applies optimistic unchoking on a random peer every 30
seconds in order to allow new peers to participate and establish their credentials. Note
that the incentive scheme has been the subject of significant research, with alternative
schemes also proposed – for example, see Sirivianos et al. [2007]. BitTorrent couples
this with a rarest first policy for scheduling downloads whereby a peer will prioritize the
chunk that is rarest amongst its set of connected peers, ensuring that chunks that are not
yet readily available will spread rapidly.
20.6.3 End System Multicast (ESM)
One of the biggest technical challenges in distributed multimedia systems is to support
the real-time broadcasting of video over the Internet. Such systems are demanding for a
variety of reasons [Liu et al. 2008]:
(cid:129) Systems must scale to potentially very large numbers of users.
(cid:129) They are particularly demanding in terms of resource usage, imposing significant
bandwidth, storage and processing constraints on the system.
(cid:129) Stringent real-time requirements must be met for the user experience to be
satisfactory.
(cid:129) Systems must be resilient and able to adapt to changing conditions in the network.
Despite these challenges, significant advances have been made and a number of
commercial-strength services are now available, including the BBC iPlayer, BoxeeTV
[boxee.tv] and Hulu [hulu.com]. In this section, we feature one example of an influential
system in this area: End System Multicast [Liu et al. 2008], developed at CMU and now
commercialized by Conviva [www.conviva.com]. Before examining the technical
approach advocated by ESM, it is helpful to place this work in context.
ESM in context • The earliest experiments in video streaming over the Internet were
constructed directly on top of IP multicast, as described in Section 4.4.1. This approach
has the advantage that support for multicast can be directly offered at a low layer in the
system, hence contributing to overall performance. However, the approach suffers from
a number of drawbacks, including the lack of support for IP multicast in many routers
and the need to maintain soft state in routers to support multicast. More fundamentally,
this also contravenes the end-to-end principle discussed in Section 2.3.3, which
advocates that support for communication functions (in this case, multimedia streaming)
can only be completely and reliably implemented with the knowledge and help of the
application standing at the endpoints of the communication system.
As a result, most systems now advocate end-system approaches to video
streaming, where control and intelligence reside at the edges of the network and not in
the network itself. This approach is also referred to as application-level multicast and
implies the formation of an overlay network to support the associated multimedia traffic
(see Section 4.5 for a discussion of overlay networks).
Taking this a step further, there is considerable interest in peer-to-peer approaches
to supporting multimedia broadcasting in the Internet, and ESM is a leading example of
such a system. More specifically, ESM employs structured peer-to-peer techniques
whereby the peers form themselves into a tree structure for subsequent real-time


===== page 927 =====
SECTION 20.6 CASE STUDIES: TIGER, BITTORRENT AND END SYSTEM MULTICAST 909
Figure 20.12 Approaches to real-time video streaming
Real-time video streaming
IP multicast–based End-system approaches
Infrastructure–based Peer-to-peer solutions
(CDNs)
Akamai
Coral
Kontiki Structured Unstructured
ESM CoolStreaming
delivery of the media. As an alternative to the structured approach advocated by ESM,
CoolStreaming offers an unstructured approach building on the insights of BitTorrent as
discussed in Section 20.6.2 (see the box on page 910 for details).
A number of systems adopt the end-system methodology but, instead of a peer-to-
peer approach, offer a fixed infrastructure to maintain multiple copies of multimedia (or
other) content located at nodes throughout the Internet, thus supporting faster delivery.
These systems are referred to as content distribution networks (CDN); leading examples
being Akamai [www.akamai.com], Coral [www.coralcdn.org] and Kontiki
[www.kontiki.com]. Such systems support a variety of styles of content delivery
including web acceleration (improved performance in accessing web content) and video
streaming – for example, Kontiki was used in the original version of the BBC iPlayer.
The range of techniques to support real-time multimedia streaming is summarized
inFigure 20.12.
ESM architecture • ESM is a structured peer-to-peer solution for the real-time
multicasting of video over the Internet. The approach was initially developed at
Carnegie Mellon University as part of research investigating the properties of the end-
system approach to multicast, and the initial prototype was used to stream videos in real
time from a variety of leading conferences, including SIGCOMM, INFOCOM and
NOSSDAV [esm.cs.cmu.edu]. As mentioned above, the approach has now been
commercialized by Conviva [www.conviva.com], who recently agreed a deal with NBC
Universal to use the Conviva platform (called C3) to deliver its content over the Internet.


===== page 928 =====
910 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
As well as investigating the end-system approach, the other key goal of ESM is to
seek resilience to change through self-organization. In particular, the underlying
protocols are designed to deal gracefully with dynamic joining and leaving by nodes,
failure of nodes and changes in the configuration and performance of the underlying
network. They promote, in particular, performance-aware adaptation, whereby the
overlay structures associated with the peer-to-peer system are frequently re-evaluated to
maximize overall performance. We discuss how this is achieved below.
ESM works by constructing a tree for each video stream, rooted in the source of
that particular stream. The key algorithmic elements to support this are:
(cid:129) how to maintain membership information;
(cid:129) howto deal with new peers joining the tree;
CoolStreaming: An unstructured P2P approach to video streaming
Many approaches to video streaming are based on a structured peer-to-peer approach,
constructing a tree, as in ESM, or an alternative overlay structure such as a forest (a
disjoint union of trees) or a mesh. CoolStreaming [Zhang et al. 2005b] takes a
radically different, unstructured approach to video streaming referred to by its
creators as a data-centric approach. In CoolStreaming, nodes maintain a partial view
of membership that is updated periodically using a gossip protocol (as in ESM).
When a new peer joins, it first contacts the source node of the desired video stream
(which is assumed to be advertised), and this node picks one node at random from its
set of known members to act as a deputy (thus balancing the load across all the
members). The new node then obtains an initial set of partners from the deputy,
bootstrapping them into the system. It should be stressed that, unlike in a tree-based
approach, this set of partners does not imply any parent-child relationships for
download; rather, the download schedule is determined dynamically and driven by
the availability of data, as explained below.
In CoolStreaming, a video file is broken into a number of fixed-sized segments,
as in BitTorrent. Each peer creates a buffer map to indicate the local availability of a
segment or segments of a file and then exchanges this information with its known
partners. This information is then used to obtain all the necessary segments of a given
video source. So far, this looks very similar to BitTorrent, but with two key
differences driven by the need for real-time streaming. First, whereas BitTorrent can
download chunks in any order, CoolStreaming must meet the desired real-time
constraints for the video playback. Second, at any given time, CoolStreaming is only
interested in a sliding window of time from the present to a period in the near future
(in practice, a sliding window of 120 1-second segments) rather than the whole file.
The calculation of the associated schedule is critical to the operation of
CoolStreaming, and although finding an optimal solution is known to be an NP-hard
problem, CoolStreaming has adopted a successful set of heuristics based on factors
including the number of potential suppliers of a segment, the bandwidth to the
suppliers and the available time to process the request.
The end result is an distributed systems architecture that can meet the real-time
requirements of video streaming and that is more naturally resilient to node failure
and changes in network performance or availability.


===== page 929 =====
SECTION 20.6 CASE STUDIES: TIGER, BITTORRENT AND END SYSTEM MULTICAST 911
Figure 20.13 An example tree in ESM
S
A E
B C D F
(cid:129) how to deal with peers leaving the tree (whether gracefully or through failure);
(cid:129) how to adapt the tree structures for performance (performance-aware adaptation
as mentioned above).
We deal with each of these elements below. Ineach of the descriptions, we refer to the
example tree structure in Figure 20.13 which is transmitting a live streaming
performance from our aforementioned musicians (Section 20.1).
Membership management • Each node maintains a partial view of membership of the
tree, with this view periodically updated using a gossip protocol (a popular method of
maintaining group membership in peer-to-peer structures, described in Section 18.4).
This operates by each member periodically picking a group member and sending this
member a subset of its view of group membership, annotated with information about
when it last heard from each member (in the form of a timestamp). There is therefore no
attempt to have a consistent global view of group membership information, but this
partial view is sufficient for the operation of the protocol, as will become apparent
below.
Joining a tree • It is assumed that the source node (the root of the tree) is advertised and
hence known to the system. A new node that wants to join contacts the source and is
given a randomly selected set of nodes taken from the group view maintained by the
source. These are effectively candidate parents for the new node, which must select an
appropriate parent from this set of possibilities.
Theparent selection protocol is crucial to the operation of ESM, with the overall
goal being to optimize the tree for performance (in particular, as we shall see, for
throughput, with latency being a secondary consideration).
The first phase of parent selection is to probe the set of members provided by the
source and to collect the following information on each candidate:


===== page 930 =====
912 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
(cid:129) the performance that node is currently receiving in terms of the throughput and
latency from the source;
(cid:129) the saturation of that node in terms of the number of children it already supports.
From a parameter obtained by probing, it is also possible to determine the round-trip
latency between the new node and the various candidate nodes.
The new node eliminates candidates that it deems saturated (defined by a built-in
constant) and then calculates the service it can expect from each of the other candidates
in terms of throughput and delay. Throughput is estimated as the minimum of the
reported throughput achieved by that node and historical data from the new node to that
candidate (this data may be available if, for example, the new node has previously
connected to this particular candidate). Delay can be estimated based on the summation
of the reported delay from the source and the latency experienced by the probe. Node
selection is based on the best available bandwidth to the new node; if bandwidth
information is not available, the selection is made on the basis of latency figures.
Returning to the example tree in Figure 20.13, suppose a new node G wants to join
this video stream. G contacts the source node S and is (randomly) given the following
set of nodes: {A, C, E and F}.A is immediately eliminated because it is deemed saturated
(supposing the definition of saturation is having three children), and C reports poor
throughput characteristics, perhaps because A is saturated. This leaves a choice between
nodes E and F.E is chosen as reporting the best available throughput figures (perhaps
the link between E and F is over a relatively low-bandwidth connection), and also G has
previously connected to E and experienced good throughput characteristics.
Dealing with nodes leaving • Members can leave a tree either through an explicit leave
request or through failure. In the former case, to avoid disruption, the leaving member
notifies children that it is leaving and is then expected to keep forwarding data for a
period to avoid disruption of service further down the tree. In the latter case, members
periodically send alive messages to their children and failure is detected when these
messages are not received.
In both cases, all the children must invoke the parent selection procedure as
defined above, with extra checks carried out to ensure candidates are not already
descendants of the given nodes.
Suppose shortly after G joins the tree, node E fails. In this case, both F and G must
run the parent selection algorithm to re-establish connectivity.
Performance-aware adaptation • Each node continually monitors the service it is
getting from its parent node (and, as mentioned above, keeps this historical information
for future reference). Adaptation is triggered if the detected rate drops significantly
below the expected rate from the source. To avoid thrashing, a node must wait for a
particular period, known as the detection time, before electing to adapt.
Once a decision is made to adapt, the node will invoke the parent selection
algorithm to determine a new, more optimal parent. In this way, the tree construction is
constantly re-evaluated and will self-organize to optimize overall performance.
For example, after a period of time, C may decide that the throughput received via
A is unsatisfactory and run the parent selection algorithm, resulting in C becoming a
child of E instead.


===== page 931 =====
SECTION 20.7 SUMMARY 913
20.7 Summary
Multimedia applications require new system mechanisms to enable them to handle large
volumes of time-dependent data. The most important of these mechanisms are
concerned with quality of service management. They must allocate bandwidth and other
resources in a manner that ensures that application resource requirements can be met,
and they must schedule the use of the resources so that the many fine-grained deadlines
of multimedia applications are met.
Quality of service management handles QoS requests from applications,
specifying the bandwidth, latency and loss rates acceptable for multimedia streams, and
it performs admission control, determining whether sufficient unreserved resources are
available to meet each new request and negotiating with the application if necessary.
Once a QoS request is accepted, the resources are reserved and a guarantee is issued to
the application.
The processor capacity and network bandwidth allocated to an application must
then be scheduled to meet the application’s needs. A real-time processor scheduling
algorithm such as earliest-deadline-first or rate-monotonic is required to ensure that
each stream element is processed in time.
Traffic shaping is the name given to algorithms that buffer real-time data to
smooth out the timing irregularities that inevitably arise. Streams can be adapted to
utilize fewer resources by reducing the bandwidth of the source (scaling) or at points
along the way (filtering).
The Tiger video file server is an excellent example of a scalable system that
provides stream delivery on a potentially very large scale with strong quality of service
guarantees. Its resource scheduling is highly specialized, and it offers an excellent
example of the changed design approach that is often required for such systems. The
other two case studies, BitTorrent and ESM, also provide strong examples of how to
support the downloading and real-time streaming of video data, respectively, again
highlighting the impact that multimedia has on systems design.
EXERCISES
20.1 Outline a system to support a distributed music rehearsal facility. Suggest suitable QoS
requirements and a hardware and software configuration that might be used.(cid:3)
pages 884,889
20.2 The Internet does not currently offer any resource reservation or quality of service
management facilities. How do the existing Internet-based audio and video streaming
applications achieve acceptable quality? What limitations do the solutions they adopt
place on multimedia applications? pages884,893,899
20.3 Explain the distinctions between the three forms of synchronization (synchronous
distributed state, media synchronization and external synchronization) that may be
required in distributed multimedia applications. Suggest mechanisms by which each of
them could be achieved, for example in a video conferencing application. page 885


===== page 932 =====
914 CHAPTER 20 DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS
20.4 Outline the design of a QoS manager to enable desktop computers connected by an
ATM network to support several concurrent multimedia applications. Define an API for
your QoS manager, giving the main operations with their parameters and results.(cid:3)
pages 889–891
20.5 In order to specify the resource requirements of software components that process
multimedia data, we need estimates of their processing loads. How can this information
be obtained without undue effort? pages 889–891
20.6 How does the Tiger system cope with a large number of clients all requesting the same
movie at random times? pages 901–906
20.7 The Tiger schedule is potentially a large data structure that changes frequently, but each
cub needs an up-to-date representation of the portions it is currently handling. Suggest
a mechanism for the distribution of the schedule to the cubs. pages 901–906
20.8 When Tiger is operating with a failed disk or cub, secondary data blocks are used in
place of missing primaries. Secondary blocks are n times smaller than primaries (where
n is the decluster factor). How does the system accommodate this variability in block
size? page 905
20.9 Discuss the relative merits of the rarest-first download policy in BitTorrent in
comparison to the more traditional sequential download approach. pages906–908
20.10 In addition to Tiger (see Exercise 20.6), both ESM and CoolStreaming also support
streaming access to the same movie by potentially large numbers of users. Discuss the
strategies adopted by both ESM and CoolStreaming for managing such simultaneous
access and compare the approaches to those advocated by Tiger.
pages 901–906,908–912


===== page 933 =====
21
DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS:(cid:3)
GOOGLE CASE STUDY
21.1 Introduction
21.2 Introducing the case study: Google
21.3 Overall architecture and design philosophy
21.4 Underlying communication paradigms
21.5 Data storage and coordination services
21.6 Distributed computation services
21.7 Summary
The ability to create an effective design is an important skill in distributed systems,
requiring an awareness of the different technological choices featured throughout this
book and a thorough understanding of the requirements of the relevant application
domain. The eventual goal is to come up with a consistent distributed system architecture
incorporating a consistent and complete set of design choices able to address the overall
requirements. This is a demanding task and one that requires considerable experience
with distributed systems development.
We illustrate distributed design through a substantial case study, examining in
detail the design of the Google infrastructure, a platform and associated middleware that
supports both Google search and a set of associated web services and applications
including Google Apps. This includes the study of key underlying components including
the physical infrastructure underpinning Google, the communication paradigms offered
by the Google infrastructure and the associated core services for storage and
computation.
Emphasis is placed on the key design principles behind the Google infrastructure
and how they pervade the overall system architecture, resulting in a consistent and
effective design.
915


===== page 934 =====
916 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
21.1 Introduction
This book has focused on the key concepts that underpin the development of distributed
systems, with an emphasis on addressing the main challenges of distributed systems,
including heterogeneity, openness, security, scalability, failure handling, concurrency,
transparency and quality of service. The subsequent treatment focuses inevitably on the
constituent parts of a distributed system, including: communication paradigms such as
remote invocation and its indirect alternatives; the programming abstractions offered by
objects, components or web services; specific distributed systems services for security,
naming and file system support; and algorithmic solutions such as coordination and
agreement. It is equally important, however, to consider the overall design of distributed
systems and how the constituent parts come together, addressing the inevitable trade-
offs between the different challenges to derive an overall system architecture that meets
the requirements of a large-scale application domain and operating environment. A
fuller treatment of distributed systems design methods would necessarily take us into the
field of software engineering methodologies for distributed systems. That is beyond the
scope of this book; those interested should see the box below for some relevant topics
and sources. Instead, we elect to provide insight into this area by presenting a case study
of a complex distributed system, highlighting the key decisions and trade-offs involved
in this design.
To motivate the studies in the book, Chapter 1 outlined three examples of key
application domains that represent many of the major challenges in distributed systems:
web search, massively multiplayer online games and financial trading. We could have
picked any one of these areas and presented an enticing and illuminating case study, but
we have chosen to focus on the first: web search (and indeed, we look beyond web
search to more general support for web-based cloud services). In particular, in this
chapter we present a case study on the distributed systems infrastructure that underpins
Google (hereafter referred to as the Google infrastructure). Google is one of the largest
distributed systems in use today, and the Google infrastructure has successfully dealt
with a variety of demanding requirements, as discussed below. The underlying
architecture and choice of concepts are also very interesting, picking up on many of the
core topics presented in this book. A study of the Google infrastructure therefore
Software engineering for distributed systems
We refer the reader to the significant advances that have been made in areas such as:
(cid:129) object-oriented design, including the use modelling notations such as UML
[Booch et al. 2005];
(cid:129) component-based software engineering (CBSE) and its relationship to
enterprise architectures [Szyperski 2002];
(cid:129) architectural patterns targeting distributed systems [Bushmann et al. 2007];
(cid:129) model-driven engineering that seeks to generate complex systems (including
distributed systems from higher-level abstractions (models) [France and
Rumpe 2007].


===== page 935 =====
SECTION 21.2 INTRODUCING THE CASE STUDY: GOOGLE 917
provides a perfect way to round off our study of distributed systems. Note that, as well
as providing an example of how to support web search, the Google infrastructure has
emerged as a leading example of cloud computing, as will become apparent in the
descriptions that follow.
Section 21.2 introduces the case study, providing background information on
Google. Section 21.3 then presents the overall design of the Google infrastructure,
considering both the underlying physical model and the associated system architecture.
Section21.4 examines the lowest level of the system architecture, the communication
paradigms supported by the Google infrastructure; the subsequent two sections,
Sections 21.5 and 21.6, discuss the core services provided by the Google infrastructure,
featuring the services for storage and processing of massive quantities of data. Sections
21.3 to 21.6 together describe a complete middleware solution for web search and cloud
computing. Finally, Section 21.7 summarizes the key points emerging from our
discussion of the Google infrastructure. Throughout the presentation, an emphasis will
be placed on identifying and justifying the core design decisions and the associated
trade-offs that are inherent in the design.
21.2 Introducing the case study: Google
Google [www.google.com III] is a US-based corporation with its headquarters in
Mountain View, California (the Googleplex), offering Internet search and broader web
applications and earning revenue largely from advertising associated with such services.
The name is a play on the word googol, the number 10100 (or 1 followed by a hundred
zeros), emphasizing the sheer scale of information available in the Internet today.
Google’s mission is to tame this huge body of information: ‘to organize the world’s
information and make it universally accessible and useful’ [www.google.com III].
Google was born out of a research project at Stanford University, with the
company launched in 1998. Since then, it has grown to have a dominant share of the
Internet search market, largely due to the effectiveness of the underlying ranking
algorithm used in its search engine (discussed further below). Significantly, Google has
diversified, and as well as providing a search engine is now a major player in cloud
computing.
From a distributed systems perspective, Google provides a fascinating case study
with extremely demanding requirements, particularly in terms of scalability, reliability,
performance and openness (see the discussion of these challenges in Section 1.5). For
example, in terms of search, it is noteworthy that the underlying system has successfully
scaled with the growth of the company from its initial production system in 1998 to
dealing with over 88 billion queries a month by the end of 2010, that the main search
engine has never experienced an outage in all that time and that users can expect query
results in around 0.2 seconds [googleblog.blogspot.com I]. The case study we present
here will examine the strategies and design decisions behind that success, and provide
insight into design of complex distributed systems.
Before proceeding to the case study, though, it is instructive to look in more detail
at the search engine and also at Google as a cloud provider.


===== page 936 =====
918 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
The Google search engine • The role of the Google search engine is, as for any web
search engine, to take a given query and return an ordered list of the most relevant results
that match that query by searching the content of the Web. The challenges stem from the
size of the Web and its rate of change, as well as the requirement to provide the most
relevant results from the perspective of its users.
We provide a brief overview of the operation of Google search below; a fuller
description of the operation of the Google search engine can be found in Langville and
Meyer [2006]. As a running example, we consider how the search engine responds to
the query ‘distributed systems book’.
The underlying search engine consists of a set of services for crawling the Web
and indexing and ranking the discovered pages, as discussed below.
Crawling: The task of the crawler is to locate and retrieve the contents of the Web and
pass the contents onto the indexing subsystem. This is performed by a software service
called Googlebot, which recursively reads a given web page, harvesting all the links
from that web page and then scheduling further crawling operations for the harvested
links (a technique known as deep searching that is highly effective in reaching
practically all pages in the Web).
In the past, because of the size of the Web, crawling was generally performed once
every few weeks. However, for certain web pages this was insufficient. For example, it
is important for search engines to be able to report accurately on breaking news or
changing share prices. Googlebot therefore took note of the change history of web pages
and revisited frequently changing pages with a period roughly proportional to how often
the pages change. With the introduction of Caffeine in 2010 [googleblog.blogspot.com
II], Google has moved from a batch approach to a more continuous process of crawling
intended to offer more freshness in terms of search results. Caffeine is built using a new
infrastructure service called Percolator that supports the incremental updating of large
datasets [Peng and Dabek 2010].
Indexing: While crawling is an important function in terms of being aware of the content
of the Web, it does not really help us with our search for occurrences of ‘distributed
systems book’. To understand how this is processed, we need to have a closer look at
indexing.
The role of indexing is to produce an index for the contents of the Web that is
similar to an index at the back of a book, but on a much larger scale. More precisely,
indexing produces what is known as an inverted index mapping words appearing in web
pages and other textual web resources (including documents in .pdf, .doc and other
formats) onto the positions where they occur in documents, including the precise
position in the document and other relevant information such as the font size and
capitalization (which is used to determine importance, as will be seen below). The index
is also sorted to support efficient queries for words against locations.
As well as maintaining an index of words, the Google search engine also
maintains an index of links, keeping track of which pages link to a given site. This is
used by the PageRank algorithm, as discussed below.
Let us return to our example query. This inverted index will allow us to discover
web pages that include the search terms ‘distributed’, ‘systems’ and ‘book’ and, by
careful analysis, we will be able to discover pages that include all of these terms. For
example, the search engine will be able to identify that the three terms can all be found


===== page 937 =====
SECTION 21.2 INTRODUCING THE CASE STUDY: GOOGLE 919
in amazon.com, www.cdk5.net and indeed many other web sites. Using the index, it is
therefore possible to narrow down the set of candidate web pages from billions to
perhaps tens of thousands, depending on the level of discrimination in the keywords
chosen.
Ranking: The problem with indexing on its own is that it provides no information about
the relative importance of the web pages containing a particular set of keywords – yet
this is crucial in determining the potential relevance of a given page. All modern search
engines therefore place significant emphasis on a system of ranking whereby a higher
rank is an indication of the importance of a page and it is used to ensure that important
pages are returned nearer to the top of the list of results than lower-ranked pages. As
mentioned above, much of the success of Google can be traced back to the effectiveness
of its ranking algorithm, PageRank [Langville and Meyer 2006].
PageRank is inspired by the system of ranking academic papers based on citation
analysis. In the academic world, a paper is viewed as important if it has a lot of citations
by other academics in the field. Similarly, in PageRank, a page will be viewed as
important if it is linked to by a large number of other pages (using the link data
mentioned above). PageRank also goes beyond simple ‘citation’ analysis by looking at
the importance of the sites that contain links to a given page. For example, a link from
bbc.co.uk will be viewed as more important than a link from Gordon Blair’s personal
web page.
Ranking in Google also takes a number of other factors into account, including the
proximity of keywords on a page and whether they are in a large font or are capitalized
(based on the information stored in the inverted index).
Returning to our example, after performing an index lookup for each of the three
words in the query, the search function ranks all the resulting page references according
to perceived importance. For example, the ranking will pick out certain page references
under amazon.com and www.cdk5.net because of the large number of links to those
pages from other ‘important’ sites. The ranking will also prioritize pages where the
terms ‘distributed’, ‘systems’ and ‘book’ appear in close proximity. Similarly, the
ranking should pull out pages where the words appear near the start of the page or in
capitals, perhaps indicating a list of distributed systems textbooks. The end result should
be a ranked list of results where the entries at the top are the most important results.
Anatomy of a search engine: The founders of Google, Sergey Brin and Larry Page, wrote
a seminal paper on the ‘anatomy’ of the Google search engine in 1998 [Brin and Page
1998], providing interesting insights into how their search engine was implemented. The
overall architecture described in this paper is illustrated in Figure 21.1, redrawn from the
original. In this diagram, we distinguish between services directly supporting web
search, drawn as ovals, and the underlying storage infrastructure components, illustrated
as rectangles.
While it is not the purpose of this chapter to present this architecture in detail, a
brief overview will aid comparison with the more sophisticated Google infrastructure
available today. The core function of crawling was described above. This takes as input
lists of URLs to be fetched, provided by the URL server, with the resultant fetched pages
placed into the store server. This data is then compressed and placed in the repository
for further analysis, in particular creating the index for searching. The indexing function
is performed in two stages. Firstly, the indexer uncompresses the data in the repository


===== page 938 =====
920 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.1 Outline architecture of the original Google search engine [Brin and Page 1998]
URL server Crawlers Store server
Anchors
Repository
URL resolver Indexer
Doc Lexicon
Links
index
Storage barrels
Sorter
PageRank Searcher
and produces a set of hits, where a hit is represented by the document ID, the word, the
position in the document and other information such as word size and capitalization.
This data is then stored in a set of barrels, a key storage element in the initial
architecture. This information is sorted by the document ID. The sorter then takes this
data and sorts it by word ID to produce the necessary inverted index (as discussed
above). The indexer also performs two other crucial functions as it parses the data: it
extracts information about links in documents storing this information in an anchors
file, and it produces a lexicon for the analyzed data (which at the time the initial
architecture was used,consisted of 14 million words). The anchors file is processed by a
URL resolver, which performs a number of functions on this data including resolving
relative URLs into absolute URLs before producing a links database, as an important
input into PageRank calculations. The URL resolver also create a doc index, which
provides input to the URL server in terms of further pages to crawl. Finally, the searcher
implements the core Google search capability, taking input from the doc index,
PageRank, the inverted index held in the barrels and also the lexicon.
One thing that is striking about this architecture is that, while specific details of
the architecture have changed, the key services supporting web search – that is,
crawling, indexing (including sorting) and ranking (through PageRank) – remain the
same.


===== page 939 =====
SECTION 21.2 INTRODUCING THE CASE STUDY: GOOGLE 921
Figure 21.2 Example Google applications
Application Description
Gmail Mail system with messages hosted by Google but desktop-like message management.
Google Docs Web-based office suite supporting shared editing of documents held on Google servers.
Google Sites Wiki-like web sites with shared editing facilities.
Google Talk Supports instant text messaging and Voice over IP.
Google Calendar Web-based calendar with all data hosted on Google servers.
Google Wave Collaboration tool integrating email, instant messaging, wikis and social networks.
Google News Fully automated news aggregator site.
Google Maps Scalable web-based world map including high-resolution imagery and unlimited user-
generated overlays.
Google Earth Scalable near-3D view of the globe with unlimited user-generated overlays.
Google App Google distributed infrastructure made available to outside parties as a service (platform as
Engine a service).
Equally striking is that, as will become apparent below, the infrastructure has
changed dramatically from the early attempts to identify an architecture for web search
to the sophisticated distributed systems support provided today, both in terms of
identifying more reusable building blocks for communication, storage and processing
and in terms of generalizing the architecture beyond search.
Google as a cloud provider • Google has diversified significantly beyond search and
now offers a wide range of web-based applications, including the set of applications
promoted as Google Apps [www.google.com I]. More generally, Google is now a major
player in the area of cloud computing. Recall that cloud computing was introduced in
Chapter 1 and defined as ‘a set of Internet-based application, storage and computing
services sufficient to support most users’ needs, thus enabling them to largely or totally
dispense with local data storage and application software’. This is exactly what Google
now strives to offer, in particular with significant offerings in the software as a service
andplatform as a service areas (as introduced in Section 7.7.1). We look at each area in
turn below.
Software as a service: This area is concerned with offering application-level software
over the Internet as web applications. A prime example is Google Apps, a set of web-
based applications including Gmail, Google Docs, Google Sites, Google Talk and
Google Calendar. Google’s aim is to replace traditional office suites with applications
supporting shared document preparation, online calendars, and a range of collaboration
tools supporting email, wikis, Voice over IP and instant messaging.
Several other innovative web-based applications have recently been developed;
these and the original Google Apps are summarized in Figure 21.2. One of the key
observations for the purposes of this chapter isthat Google encourages an open approach
to innovation within the organization, and hence new applications are emerging all the


===== page 940 =====
922 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
time. This places particular demands on the underlying distributed systems
infrastructure, a point that is revisited in Section 21.3.2.
Platform as a service: This area is concerned with offering distributed system APIs as
services across the Internet, with these APIs used to support the development and
hosting of web applications (note that the use of the term ‘platform’ in this context is
unfortunately inconsistent with the way it is used elsewhere in this book, where it refers
to the hardware and operating system level). With the launch of the Google App Engine,
Google went beyond software as a service and now offers its distributed systems
infrastructure as discussed throughout this chapter as a cloud service. More specifically,
the Google business is already predicated on using this cloud infrastructure internally to
support all its applications and services, including its web search engine. The Google
App Engine now provides external access to a part of this infrastructure, allowing other
organizations to run their own web applications on the Google platform.
We will see further details of the Google infrastructure as this chapter unfolds;
refer to the Google web site for further details of the Google App Engine
[code.google.com IV].
21.3 Overall architecture and design philosophy
This section looks at the overall architecture of the Google system, examining:
(cid:129) the physical architecture adopted by Google;
(cid:129) the associated system architecture that offers common services to the Internet
search engine and the many web applications offered by Google.
21.3.1 Physical model
The key philosophy of Google in terms of physical infrastructure is to use very large
numbers of commodity PCs to produce a cost-effective environment for distributed
storage and computation. Purchasing decisions are based on obtaining the best
performance per dollar rather than absolute performance with a typical spend on a single
PC unit of around $1,000. A given PC will typically have around 2 terabytes of disk
storage and around 16 gigabytes of DRAM (dynamic random access memory) and run
a cut-down version of the Linux kernel. (This philosophy of building systems from
commodity PCs reflects the early days of the original research project, when Sergey
Brin and Larry Page built the first Google search engine from spare hardware scavenged
from around the lab at Stanford University.)
In electing to go down the route of commodity PCs, Google has recognized that
parts of its infrastructure will fail and hence, as we will see below, has designed the
infrastructure using a range of strategies to tolerate such failures. Hennessy and
Patterson [2006] report the following failure characteristics for Google:
(cid:129) By far the most common source of failure is due to software, with about 20
machines needing to be rebooted per day due to software failures. (Interestingly,
the rebooting process is entirely manual.)


===== page 941 =====
SECTION 21.3 OVERALL ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 923
(cid:129) Hardware failures represent about 1/10 of the failures due to software with around
2–3% of PCs failing per annum due to hardware faults. Of these, 95% are due to
faults in disks or DRAM.
This vindicates the decision to procure commodity PCs; given that the vast majority of
failures are due to software, it is not worthwhile to invest in more expensive, more
reliable hardware. A further paper by Pinheiro et al. [2007] also reports on the failure
characteristics of commodity disks as used in the Google physical infrastructure,
providing an interesting insight into failure patterns of disk storage in large-scale
deployments.
The physical architecture is constructed as follows [Hennessy and Patterson
2006]:
(cid:129) Commodity PCs are organized in racks with between 40 and 80 PCs in a given
rack. The racks are double-sided with half the PCs on each side. Each rack has an
Ethernet switch that provides connectivity across the rack and also to the external
world (see below). This switch is modular, organized as a number of blades with
each blade supporting either 8 100-Mbps network interfaces or a single 1-Gbps
interface. For 40 PCs, five blades each containing eight network interfaces are
sufficient to ensure connectivity within the rack. Two further blades, each
supporting a 1-Gbps network interface, are used for connection to the outside
world.
(cid:129) Racks are organized into clusters (as discussed in Section 1.3.4), which are a key
unit of management, determining for example the placement and replication of
services. A cluster typically consists of 30 or more racks and two high-bandwidth
switches providing connectivity to the outside world (the Internet and other
Google centres). Each rack is connected to both switches for redundancy; in
addition, for further redundancy, each switch has redundant links to the outside
world.
(cid:129) Clusters are housed in Google data centres that are spread around the world. In
2000, Google relied on key data centres in Silicon Valley (two centres) and in
Virginia. At the time of writing, the number of data centres has grown
significantly and there are now centres in many geographical locations across the
US and in Dublin (Ireland), Saint-Ghislain (Belgium), Zurich (Switzerland),
Tokyo (Japan) and Beijing (China). (A map of known data centres as of 2008 can
be found here [royal.pingdom.com].)
A simplified view of this overall organization is provided in Figure 21.3. This physical
infrastructure provides Google with enormous storage and computational capabilities,
together with the necessary redundancy to build fault-tolerant, large-scale systems (note
that, to avoid clutter, this figure only shows the Ethernet connections from one of the
clusters to the external links).
Storage capacity: Let us consider the storage capacity available to Google. If each
PC offers 2 terabytes of storage, then a rack of 80 PCs will provide 160 terabytes,
with a cluster of 30 racks offering 4.8 petabytes. It is not known exactly how many
machines Google has in total as the company maintains strict secrecy over this aspect
of its business, but we can assume Google has on the order of 200 clusters, offering


===== page 942 =====
924 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.3 Organization of the Google physical infrastructure
Racks Racks
...... ......
XX XX XX XX Switches XX XX XX XX
Cluster Cluster
Racks
......
Switches X XX XX XX
Cluster
Data centre architecture
To other data centres and the Internet
(To avoid clutter the Ethernet connections are shown from only one of the clusters to the external links)
total storage capacity of 960 petabytes or just under 1 exabyte of storage (1018 bytes).
This is likely to be a conservative figure, as Google VP Marissa Mayer is already
talking about the data explosion taking us well into the exascale range
[www.parc.com].
We shall see how Google uses this extensive storage and computational capability
and the associated redundancy to offer core services in the remainder of this chapter.
21.3.2 Overall system architecture
Before examining the overall system architecture, it is helpful to examine the key
requirements in more detail:
Scalability: The first and most obvious requirement for the underlying Google
infrastructure is to master scalability and, in particular, to have approaches that scale
to what is an Ultra-Large Scale (ULS) distributed system as featured in Chapter 2.
For the search engine, Google views the scalability problem in terms of three
dimensions: i) being able to deal with more data (for example, as the amount of
information in the Web grows through initiatives such as the digitizing of libraries),
ii) being able to deal with more queries (as the number of people using Google in their


===== page 943 =====
SECTION 21.3 OVERALL ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 925
Figure 21.4 The scalability problem in Google
More queries
Better results
More data
homes and workplaces grows) and iii) seeking better results (particularly important
as this is a key determining factor in uptake of a web search engine). This view of the
scalability problem is illustrated in Figure 21.4.
Scalability demands the use of (sophisticated) distributed systems strategies.
Let us illustrate this with a simple analysis taken from Jeff Dean’s keynote at
PACT’06 [Dean 2006]. He assumed that the Web consists of around 20 billion web
pages at 20 kilobytes each. This implies a total size of around 400 terabytes. To crawl
this amount of data it would take a single computer over 4 months assuming that the
computer can read 30 megabytes per second. In contrast, 1,000 machines can read
this amount of data in less than 3 hours. In addition, as we saw in Section 21.2,
searching is not only about crawling. The other functions, including indexing,
ranking and searching, all require highly distributed solutions in order to be able to
scale.
Reliability: Google has stringent reliability requirements, especially with regard to
availability of services. This is particularly important for the search functionality,
where there is a need to provide 24/7 availability (noting, however that it is
intrinsically easy to mask failures in search as the user has no way of knowing if all
search results are returned). This requirement also applies to other web applications,
and it is interesting to note that Google offers a 99.9% service level agreement
(effectively, a system guarantee) to paying customers of Google Apps covering
Gmail, Google Calendar, Google Docs, Google Sites and Google Talk. The company
has an excellent overall record in terms of availability of services, but the well-
reported outage of Gmail on 1 September 2009 acts as a reminder of the continuing
challenges in this area. (This outage, which lasted 100 minutes, was caused by a
cascading problem of overloading servers during a period of routine maintenance).
Note that the reliability requirement must be met in the context of the design choices
in the physical architecture, which imply that (software and hardware) failures are
anticipated with reasonable frequency. This demands both detecting failures and
adopting strategies to mask or tolerate such failures. Such strategies rely heavily on
the redundancy in the underlying physical architecture. We shall see examples of
such strategies as the details of the system architecture emerge.


===== page 944 =====
926 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.5 The overall Google systems architecture
Google applications and services
Google infrastructure (middleware)
Google platform
Performance: The overall performance of the system is critical for Google,
especially in achieving low latency of user interactions. The better the performance,
the more likely it is that a user will return with more queries that, in turn, increase
their exposure to ads hence potentially increasing revenue. The importance of
performance is exemplified by the target of completing web search operations in 0.2
seconds (as mentioned above) and achieving the required throughput to respond to
all incoming requests while dealing with very large datasets. This applies to a wide
range of functions associated with the operation of Google, including web crawling,
indexing and sorting. It is also important to note that performance is an end-to-end
property requiring all associated underlying resources to work together, including
network, storage and computational resources.
Openness: The above requirements are in many ways the obvious ones for Google
to support its core services and applications. There is also a strong requirement for
openness, particularly to support further development in the range of web
applications on offer. It is well known that Google as an organization encourages and
nurtures innovation, and this is most evident in the development of new web
applications. This is only possible with an infrastructure that is extensible and
provides support for the development of new applications.
Google has responded to these needs by developing the overall system
architecture shown in Figure 21.5. This figure shows the underlying computing
platform at the bottom (that is, the physical architecture as described above) and the
well-known Google services and applications at the top. The middle layer defines a
common distributed infrastructure providing middleware support for search and
cloud computing. This is crucial to the success of Google. The infrastructure provides
the common distributed system services for developers of Google services and
applications and encapsulates key strategies for dealing with scalability, reliability
and performance. The provision of a well-designed common infrastructure such as
this can bootstrap the development of new applications and services through reuse of
the underlying system services and, more subtly, provides an overall coherence to the
growing Google code base by enforcing common strategies and design principles.


===== page 945 =====
SECTION 21.3 OVERALL ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 927
Figure 21.6 Google infrastructure
Distributed computation MapReduce Sawzall
Data and coordination GFS Chubby Bigtable
Communication paradigms Protocol buffers Publish-subscribe
Google infrastructure • The system is constructed as a set of distributed services
offering core functionality to developers (see Figure 21.6). This set of services naturally
partitions into the following subsets:
(cid:129) the underlying communication paradigms, including services for both remote
invocation and indirect communication:
– the protocol buffers component offers a common serialization format for
Google, including the serialization of requests and replies in remote invocation.
– the Google publish-subscribe service supports the efficient dissemination of
events to potentially large numbers of subscribers.
(cid:129) data and coordination services providing unstructured and semi-structured
abstractions for the storage of data coupled with services to support coordinated
access to the data:
– GFS offers a distributed file system optimized for the particular requirements
ofGoogle applications and services (including the storage of very large files).
– Chubby supports coordination services and the ability to store small volumes
of data.
– Bigtable provides a distributed database offering access to semi-structured
data.
(cid:129) distributed computation services providing means for carrying out parallel and
distributed computation over the physical infrastructure:
– MapReduce supports distributed computation over potentially very large
datasets (for example, stored in Bigtable).


===== page 946 =====
928 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
– Sawzall provides a higher-level language for the execution of such distributed
computations.
We step through each of these components in turn in Sections 21.4 through 21.6. First,
however, it is instructive to reflect on key design principles associated with the
architecture as a whole.
Associated design principles • To fully understand the design of Google infrastructure,
it is important to also have an understanding of key design philosophies that pervade the
organization:
(cid:129) The most important design principle behind Google software is that of simplicity:
software should do one thing and do it well, avoiding feature-rich designs
wherever possible. For example, Bloch [2006] discusses how this principle
applies to API design implying that API designs should be as small as possible and
no smaller (an example of the application of Occam’s Razor).
(cid:129) Another key design principle is a strong emphasis on performance in the
development of systems software, captured in the phrase ‘every millisecond
counts’ [www.google.com IV]. In a keynote at LADIS’09, Jeff Dean (a member
of the Google Systems Infrastructure Group) emphasized the importance of being
able to estimate the performance of a system design through awareness of
performance costs of primitive operations such as accessing memory and disk,
sending packets over a network, locking and unlocking a mutex and so on,
coupled with what he referred to as ‘back of the envelope’ calculations
[www.cs.cornell.edu].
(cid:129) A final principle is advocating stringent testing regimes on software, captured by
the slogan ‘if it ain’t broke, you are not trying hard enough’
[googletesting.blogspot.com]. This is complemented by a strong emphasis on
logging and tracing to detect and resolve faults in the system.
With this background, we are now ready to examine the various constituent parts of the
Google infrastructure, starting with the underlying communication paradigms. For each
area, we present the overall design and highlight the key design decisions and associated
trade-offs.
21.4 Underlying communication paradigms
Looking back at Chapters 3 to 6, it is clear that the choice of underlying communication
paradigm(s) is crucial to the success of an overall system design. Options include:
(cid:129) using an underlying interprocess communication service directly, such as that
offered by socket abstractions (described in Chapter 4 and supported by all
modern operating systems);
(cid:129) using a remote invocation service (such as a request-reply protocol, remote
procedure calls or remote method invocation, as discussed in Chapter 5) offering
support for client-server interactions;


===== page 947 =====
SECTION 21.4 UNDERLYING COMMUNICATION PARADIGMS 929
(cid:129) using an indirect communication paradigm such as group communication,
distributed event-based approaches, tuple spaces or distributed shared memory
approaches (as discussed in Chapter 6).
In keeping with the design principles identified in Section 21.3, Google adopts a simple,
minimal and efficient remote invocation service that is a variant of a remote procedure
call approach.
Readers will recall that remote procedure call communication requires a
serialization component to convert the procedure invocation data (procedure name and
parameters, possibly structured) from their internal binary representation to a flattened
or serialized processor-neutral format ready for transmission to the remote partner.
Serialization for Java RPC is described in Section 4.3.2. XML has emerged more
recently as a ‘universal’ serialized data format, but its generality brings substantial
overheads. Google has therefore developed a simplified and high-performance
serialization component known as protocol buffers that is used for a substantial majority
of interactions within the infrastructure. This can be used over any underlying
communication mechanism to provide an RPC capability. An open source version of
protocol buffers is available [code.google.com I].
A separate publish-subscribe service is also used, recognizing the key role that
this paradigm can offer in many areas of distributed system design, including the
efficient and real-time dissemination of events to multiple participants. In common with
many other distributed system platforms, the Google infrastructure therefore offers a
hybrid solution allowing developers to select the best communication paradigm for their
requirements. Publish-susbcribe is not an alternative to protocol buffers in the Google
infrastructure, but rather an augmentation offering an added-value service for where it
is most appropriate.
We examine the design of these two approaches below, with emphasis on protocol
buffers (full details of the publish-subscribe protocol are not yet publicly available).
21.4.1 Remote invocation
Protocol buffers place emphasis on the description and subsequent serialization of data,
and hence the concept is best compared to direct alternatives such as XML. The goal is
to provide a language- and platform-neutral way to specify and serialize data in a
manner that is simple, highly efficient and extensible; the serialized data can then be
used for subsequent storage of data or transmission using an underlying
communications protocol, or indeed for any other purpose that demands a serialization
format for structured data. We will see later how this can be used as the basis for RPC-
style exchange.
In protocol buffers, a language is provide for the specification of messages. We
introduce the key features of this (simple) language by example, with Figure 21.7
showing how a book message might be specified.
As can be seen, the overall Book message consists of a series of uniquely
numbered fields, each represented by a field name and the type of the associated value.
The type can be one of:
(cid:129) a primitive data type (including integer, floating-point, boolean, string or raw
bytes);


===== page 948 =====
930 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.7 Protocol buffers example
message Book {
required string title = 1;
repeated string author = 2;
enum Status {
IN_PRESS = 0;
PUBLISHED = 1;
OUT_OF_PRINT = 2;
}
message BookStats {
required int32 sales = 1;
optional int32 citations = 2;
optional Status bookstatus = 3 [default = PUBLISHED];
}
optional BookStats statistics = 3;
repeated string keyword = 4;
}
(cid:129) anenumerated type;
(cid:129) anested message allowing a hierarchical structuring of data.
We can see examples of each in Figure 21.7.
Fields are annotated with one of three labels:
(cid:129) requiredfields must be present in the message;
(cid:129) optional fields may be present in the message;
(cid:129) repeated fields can exist zero or more times in the message (the developers of
protocol buffers view this as a type of dynamically sized array).
Again, we can see uses of each annotation in the Book message format illustrated in
Figure 21.7.
The unique number (=1, =2 and so on) represents the tag that a particular field has
in the binary encoding of the message.
This specification is contained in a .proto file and compiled by a protoc tool. The
output of this tool is generated code that allows programmers to manipulate the
particular message type, in particular assigning/extracting values to/from messages. In
more detail, the protoc tool generates a builder class that provides getter and setter
methods for each field together with additional methods to test if a method has been set
and to clear a field to the associated null value. For example, the following methods
would be generated for the title field:
public boolean hasTitle();
public java.lang.String getTitle();
public Builder setTitle(String value);
public Builder clearTitle();


===== page 949 =====
SECTION 21.4 UNDERLYING COMMUNICATION PARADIGMS 931
The importance of the builder class is that while messages are immutable in protocol
buffers, builders are mutable and are used to construct and manipulate new messages.
For repeated fields the generated code is slightly more complicated, with methods
provided to return a count of the number of elements in the associated list, to get or set
specific fields in the list, to append a new element to a list and to add a set of elements
to a list (the addAll method). We illustrate this by example by listing the methods
generated for the keyword field:
public List<string> getKeywordList();
public int getKeywordCount();
public string getKeyword(int index);
public Builder setKeyword(int index, string value);
public Builder addKeyword(string value);
public Builder addAllKeyword(Iterable<string> value);
public Builder clearKeyword();
The generated code also provides a range of other methods to manipulate messages,
including methods such as toString to provide a readable representation of the message
(often used for debugging for example) and also a series of methods to parse incoming
messages.
As can be seen, this is a very simple format compared to XML (for example,
contrast the specification above with equivalent specifications in XML as shown in
Section 4.3.3), and one that its developers claim is 3 to 10 times smaller than XML
equivalents and 10 to 100 times faster in operation. The associated programming
interface providing access to the data is also considerably simpler than equivalents for
XML.
Note that this is a somewhat unfair comparison, for two reasons. Firstly, the
Google infrastructure is a relatively closed system and hence, unlike, XML, it does not
address interoperability across open systems. Secondly, XML is significantly richer in
that it generates self-describing messages that contain the data and associated metadata
describing the structure of the messages (see Section 4.3.3). Protocol buffers do not
provide this facility directly (although it is possible to achieve this effect, as described
in the relevant web pages in a section on techniques [code.google.com II]). In outline,
this is achieved by asking the protoc compiler to generate a FileDescriptorSet that
contains self-descriptions of messages, and then including this explicitly in message
descriptions. The developers of protocol buffers, though, emphasize that this is not seen
as a particularly useful feature and that it is rarely used in the Google infrastructure code.
Supporting RPC • As mentioned above, protocol buffers are a general mechanism that
can be used for storage or communication. The most common use of protocol buffers,
however, is to specify RPC exchanges across the network, and this is accommodated
with extra syntax in the language. Again, we illustrate the syntax by example:
service SearchService {
rpc Search (RequestType) returns (ResponseType);
}
This code fragment specifies a service interface called SearchService containing one
remote operation, Search, which takes one parameter of type RequestType and returns
one parameter of type ResponseType. For example, the types could correspond to a list


===== page 950 =====
932 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
of keywords and a list of Books matching this set of keywords, respectively. The protoc
compiler takes this specification and produces both an abstract interface SearchService
and a stub that supports type-safe RPC-style calls to the remote service using protocol
buffers.
As well as being language- and platform-neutral, protocol buffers are also
agnostic with respect to the underlying RPC protocol. In particular, the stub assumes
that implementations exist for two abstract interfaces RpcChannel and RpcController,
the former offering a common interface to underlying RPC implementations and the
latter offering a common control interface, for example, to manipulate settings
associated with that implementation. A programmer must provide implementations of
these abstract interfaces, effectively selecting the desired RPC implementation. For
example, this could pass serialized messages using HTTP or TCP or could map onto one
of a number of third-party RPC implementations available and linked from the protocol
buffers site [code.google.com III].
Note that a service interface can support multiple remote operations, but each
operation must adhere to the pattern of taking a single parameter and returning a single
result (with both being protocol buffer messages). This is unusual compared to the
designs of RPC and RMI systems – as we saw in Chapter 5 – remote invocations can
have an arbitrary number of parameters, and in the case of RMI the parameters or results
can be objects or indeed object references (although note that Sun RPC, as documented
in Section 5.3.3, adopts a similar approach to protocol buffers). The rationale for having
one request and one reply is to support extensibility and software evolution; whereas the
more general styles of interface may change significantly over time, this more
constrained style of interface is likely to remain more constant. This approach also
pushes the complexity towards the data in a manner that is reminiscent of the REST
philosophy, with its constrained set of operations and emphasis on manipulating
resources (see Section 9.2).
21.4.2 Publish-subscribe
Protocol buffers are used extensively but not exclusively as the communication
paradigm in the Google infrastructure. To complement protocol buffers, the
infrastructure also supports a publish-subscribe system intended to be used where
distributed events need to be disseminated in real time and with reliability guarantees to
potentially large numbers of recipients. As mentioned above, the publish-subscribe
service is an augmentation to protocol buffers and indeed uses protocol buffers for its
underlying communication.
One key use for the publish-subscribe system, for example, is to underpin the
Google Ads system, recognizing that advertisments in Google are world-wide and that
advertisement serving systems anywhere in the network need to know in a fraction of a
second the eligibility of certain advertisements that can be shown in response to a query.
The RPC system described above would clearly be inappropriate and highly
inefficient for this style of interaction, especially given the potentially large numbers of
subscribers and the guarantees required by the associated applications. In particular, the
sender would need to know the identity of all the other advertisment serving systems,
which could be very large. RPCs would need to be sent to all the individual serving
systems, consuming many connections and a great deal of associated buffer space at the


===== page 951 =====
SECTION 21.4 UNDERLYING COMMUNICATION PARADIGMS 933
sender, not to mention the bandwidth requirements of sending the data across wide area
network links. A publish-subsribe solution, in contrast, with its inherent time and space
uncoupling, overcomes these difficulties and also offers natural support for failure and
recovery of subscribers (see Section 6.1).
Google has not made details of the publish-subscribe system publicly available.
We therefore restrict our discussion to some high-level features of the system.
Google adopts a topic-based publish-subscribe system, providing a number of
channels for event streams with channels corresponding to particular topics. A topic-
based system was chosen for its ease of implementation and its relative predictability in
terms of performance compared to content-based approaches – that is, the infrastructure
can be set up and tailored to deliver events related to a given topic. The downside is a
lack of expressive power in specifying events of interest. As a compromise, the Google
publish-subscribe system allows enhanced subscriptions defined not just by selecting a
channel but also by selecting subsets of events from within that channel. In particular, a
given event consists of a header, an associated set of keywords and a payload, which is
opaque to the programmer. Subscription requests specify the channel together with a
filter defined over the set of keywords. Channels are intended to be used for relatively
static and coarse-grained data streams requiring high throughputs of events (at least 1-
Mbps), so the added capability for expressing refined subscriptions using filters helps
greatly. For example, if a topic generates less than this volume of data, it will be
subsumed within another topic but identifiable by keyword.
The publish-subscribe system is implemented as a broker overlay in the form of a
set of trees, where each tree represents a topic. The root of the tree is the publisher and
the leaf nodes represent subscribers. When filters are introduced, they are pushed as far
back in the tree as possible to minimize unnecessary traffic.
Unlike the publish-subscribe systems discussed in Chapter 6, there is a strong
emphasis on both reliable and timely delivery:
(cid:129) In terms of reliability, the system maintains redundant trees; in particular, two
separate tree overlays are maintained per logical channel (topic).
(cid:129) In terms of timely delivery, the system implements a quality of service
management technique to control message flows. In particular, a simple rate
control scheme is introduced based on an imposed rate limit enforced on a per
user/ per topic basis. This replaces a more complex approach and manages the
anticipated resource usage across the tree in terms of memory, CPU and message
and byte rates.
Trees are initially constructed and constantly re-evaluated according to a shortest path
algorithm (see Chapter 3).
21.4.3 Summary of key design choices for communication
The overall design choices relating to communication paradigms in the Google
infrastructure are summarized in Figure 21.8. This table highlights the most important
decisions associated with the overall design and the constituent elements (protocol
buffers and the publish-subscribe system) and summarizes the rationale and the
particular trade-offs associated with each choice.


===== page 952 =====
934 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.8 Summary of design choices related to communication paradigms
Element Design choice Rationale Trade-offs
Protocol buffers The use of a Flexible in that -
language for the same
specifying data language can be
formats used for
serializing data
for storage or
communication
Simplicity of the Efficient Lack of
language implementation expressiveness when
compared, for
example, with XML
Support for a More efficient, Lack of
style of RPC extensible and expressiveness when
(taking a single supports service compared with other
message as a evolution RPC or RMI packages
parameter and
returning a single
message as
result)
Protocol-agnostic Different RPC No common semantics
design implementation for RPC exchanges
s can be used
Publish-subscribe Topic-based Supports Less expressive than
approach efficient content-based
implementation approaches (mitigated
by the additional
filtering capabilities)
Real-time and Supports Additional
reliability maintenance of algorithmic support
guarantees consistent views required with
in a timely associated overhead
manner
Overall, we see a hybrid approach offering two distinct communication paradigms
designed to support different styles of interaction within the architecture. This allows
developers to select the best paradigm for each particular problem domain.
We shall repeat this style of analysis at theend of each of the following sections,
thus providing an overall perspective of key design decisions relating to the Google
infrastructure.


===== page 953 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 935
21.5 Data storage and coordination services
We now present the three services that together provide data and coordination services
to higher-level applications and services: the Google File System, Chubby and Bigtable.
These are complementary services in the Google infrastructure:
(cid:129) The Google File System is a distributed file system offering a similar service to
NFS and AFS, as discussed in Chapter 12. It offers access to unstructured data in
the form of files, but optimized to the styles of data and data access required by
Google (very large files, for example).
(cid:129) Chubby is a multi-faceted service supporting, for example, coarse-grained
distributed locking for coordination in the distributed environment and the storage
of very small quantities of data, complementing the large-scale storage offered by
the Google File System.
(cid:129) Bigtable offers access to more structured data in the form of tables that can be
indexed in various ways including by row or column. Bigtable is therefore a style
of distributed database, but unlike many databases it does not support full
relational operators (these are viewed by Google as unnecessarily complex and
unscalable ).
These three services are also interdependent. For example, Bigtable uses the Google File
System for storage and Chubby for coordination.
We look at each service in detail below.
21.5.1 The Google File System (GFS)
Chapter 12 presented a detailed study of the topic of distributed file systems, analyzing
their requirements and their overall architecture and examining two case studies in
detail, namely NFS and AFS. These file systems are general-purpose distributed file
systems offering file and directory abstractions to a wide variety of applications in and
across organizations. The Google File System (GFS) is also a distributed file system; it
offers similar abstractions but is specialized for the very particular requirements that
Google has in terms of storage and access to very large quantities of data [Ghemawat et
al. 2003]. These requirements led to very different design decisions from those made in
NFS and AFS (and indeed other distributed file systems), as we will see below. We start
our discussion of GFS by examining the particular requirements identified by Google.
GFS requirements • The overall goal of GFS is to meet the demanding and rapidly
growing needs of Google’s search engine and the range of other web applications
offered by the company. From an understanding of this particular domain of operation,
Google identified the following requirements for GFS (see Ghemawat et al. [2003]):
(cid:129) The first requirement is that GFS must run reliably on the physical architecture
discussed in Section 21.3.1 – that is a very large system built from commodity
hardware. The designers of GFS started with the assumption that components will
fail (not just hardware components but also software components) and that the
design must be sufficiently tolerant of such failures to enable application-level


===== page 954 =====
936 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
services to continue their operation in the face of any likely combination of failure
conditions.
(cid:129) GFS is optimized for the patterns of usage within Google, both in terms of the
types of files stored and the patterns of access to those files. The number of files
stored in GFS is not huge in comparison with other systems, but the files tend to
be massive. For example, Ghemawat et al. [2003] report the need for perhaps one
million files averaging 100 megabytes in size, but with some files in the gigabyte
range. The patterns of access are also atypical of file systems in general. Accesses
are dominated by sequential reads through large files and sequential writes that
append data to files, and GFS is very much tailored towards this style of access.
Small, random reads and writes do occur (the latter very rarely) and are supported,
but the system is not optimized for such cases. These file patterns are influenced,
for example, by the storage of many web pages sequentially in single files that are
scanned by a variety of data analysis programs. The level of concurrent access is
also high in Google, with large numbers of concurrent appends being particularly
prevalent, often accompanied by concurrent reads.
(cid:129) GFS must meet all the requirements for the Google infrastructure as a whole; that
is, it must scale (particularly in terms of volume of data and number of clients), it
must be reliable in spite of the assumption about failures noted above, it must
perform well and it must be open in that it should support the development of new
web applications. In terms of performance and given the types of data file stored,
the system is optimized for high and sustained throughput in reading data, and this
is prioritized over latency. This is not to say that latency is unimportant, rather,
that this particular component (GFS) needs to be optimized for high-performance
reading and appending of large volumes of data for the correct operation of the
system as a whole.
These requirements are markedly different from those for NFS and AFS (for example),
which must store large numbers of often small files and where random reads and writes
are commonplace. These distinctions lead to the very particular design decisions
discussed below.
GFS interface • GFS provides a conventional file system interface offering a
hierarchical namespace with individual files identified by pathnames. Although the file
system does not provide full POSIX compatibility, many of the operations will be
familiar to users of such file systems (see, for example, Figure 12.4):
create – create a new instance of a file;
delete – delete an instance of a file;
open – open a named file and return a handle;
close – close a given file specified by a handle;
read – read data from a specified file;
write – write data to a specified file.
It can be seen that main GFS operations are very similar to those for the flat file service
described in Chapter 12 (see Figure 12.6). We should assume that the GFS read and


===== page 955 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 937
Figure 21.9 Overall architecture of GFS
Client control flow
GFS client GFS master
library metadata
GFS chunkserver GFS chunkserver
.....
data chunks data chunks
data flow
write operations take a parameter specifying a starting offset within the file, as is the
case for the flat file service.
The API also offers two more specialized operations, snapshot and record
append. The former operation provides an efficient mechanism to make a copy of a
particular file or directory tree structure. The latter supports the common access pattern
mentioned above whereby multiple clients carry out concurrent appends to a given file.
GFS architecture • The most influential design choice in GFS is the storage of files in
fixed-size chunks, where each chunk is 64 megabytes in size. This is quite large
compared to other file system designs. At one level this simply reflects the size of the
files stored in GFS. At another level, this decision is crucial to providing highly efficient
sequential reads and appends of large amounts of data. We return to this point below,
once we have discussed more details of the GFS architecture.
Given this design choice, the job of GFS is to provide a mapping from files to
chunks and then to support standard operations on files, mapping down to operations on
individual chunks. This is achieved with the architecture shown in Figure 21.9, which
shows an instance of a GFS file system as it maps onto a given physical cluster. Each
GFS cluster has a single master and multiple chunkservers (typically on the order of
hundreds), which together provide a file service to large numbers of clients concurrently
accessing the data.
The role of the master is to manage metadata about the file system defining the
namespace for files, access control information and the mapping of each particular file
to the associated set of chunks. In addition, all chunks are replicated (by default on three
independent chunkservers, but the level of replication can be specified by the
programmer). The location of the replicas is maintained in the master. Replication is
important in GFS to provide the necessary reliability in the event of (expected) hardware
and software failures. This is in contrast to NFS and AFS, which do not provide
replication with updates (see Chapter 12).
The key metadata is stored persistently in an operation log that supports recovery
in the event of crashes (again enhancing reliability). In particular, all the information
mentioned above is logged apart from the location of replicas (the latter is recovered by
polling chunkservers and asking them what replicas they currently store).


===== page 956 =====
938 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Although the master is centralized, and hence a single point of failure, the
operations log is replicated on several remote machines, so the master can be readily
restored on failure. The benefit of having such a single, centralized master is that it has
aglobal view of the file system and hence it can make optimum management decisions,
for example related to chunk placement. This scheme is also simpler to implement,
allowing Google to develop GFS in a relatively short period of time. McKusick and
Quinlan [2010] present the rationale for this rather unusual design choice.
When clients need to access data starting from a particular byte offset within a file,
the GFS client library will first translate this to a file name and chunk index pair (easily
computed given the fixed size of chunks). This is then sent to the master in the form of
an RPC request (using protocol buffers). The master replies with the appropriate chunk
identifier and location of the replicas, and this information is cached in the client and
used subsequently to access the data by direct RPC invocation to one of the replicated
chunkservers. In this way, the master is involved at the start and is then completely out
of the loop, implementing a separation of control and data flows – a separation that is
crucial to maintaining high performance of file accesses. Combined with the large chunk
size, this implies that, once a chunk has been identified and located, the 64 megabytes
can then be read as fast as the file server and network will allow without any other
interactions with the master until another chunk needs to be accessed. Hence
interactions with the master are minimized and throughput optimized. The same
argument applies to sequential appends.
Note that one further repercussion of the large chunk size is that GFS maintains
proportionally less metadata (if a chunk size of 64 kilobytes was adopted, for example,
the volume of metadata would increase by a factor of 1,000). This in turn implies that
GFS masters can generally maintain all their metadata in main memory (but see below),
thus significantly decreasing the latency for control operations.
As the system has grown in usage, problems have emerged with the centralized
master scheme:
(cid:129) Despite the separation of control and data flow and the performance optimization
of the master, it is emerging as a bottleneck in the design.
(cid:129) Despite the reduced amount of metadata stemming from the large chunk size, the
amount of metadata stored by each master is increasing to a level where it is
difficult to actually keep all metadata in main memory.
For these reasons, Google is now working on a new design featuring a distributed master
solution.
Caching: As we saw in Chapter 12, caching often plays a crucial role in the performance
and scalability of a file system (see also the more general discussion on caching in
Section 2.3.1). Interestingly, GFS does not make heavy use of caching. As mentioned
above, information about the locations of chunks is cached at clients when first
accessed, to minimize interactions with the master. Apart from that, no other client
caching is used. In particular, GFS clients do not cache file data. Given the fact that most
accesses involve sequential streaming, for example reading through web content to
produce the required inverted index, such caches would contribute little to the
performance of the system. Furthermore, by limiting caching at clients, GFS also avoids
the need for cache coherency protocols.


===== page 957 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 939
GFS also does not provide any particular strategy for server-side caching (that is,
on chunkservers) rather relying on the buffer cache in Linux to maintain frequently
accessed data in memory.
Logging: GFS is a key example of the use of logging in Google to support debugging
and performance analysis. In particular, GFS servers all maintain extensive diagnostic
logs that store significant server events and all RPC requests and replies. These logs are
monitored continually and used in the event of system problems to identify the
underlying causes.
Managing consistency in GFS • Given that chunks are replicated in GFS, it is important
to maintain the consistency of replicas in the face of operations that alter the data – that
is, the write and record append operations. GFS provides an approach for consistency
management that:
(cid:129) maintains the previously mentioned separation between control and data and
hence allows high-performance updates to data with minimal involvement of
masters;
(cid:129) provides a relaxed form of consistency recognizing, for example, the particular
semantics offered by record append.
The approach proceeds as follows.
When a mutation (i.e., a write, append or delete operation) is requested for a
chunk, the master grants a chunk lease to one of the replicas, which is then designated
as the primary. This primary is responsible for providing a serial order for all the
currently pending concurrent mutations to that chunk. A global ordering is thus provided
by the ordering of the chunk leases combined with the order determined by that primary.
In particular, the lease permits the primary to make mutations on its local copies and to
control the order of the mutations at the secondary copies; another primary will then be
granted the lease, and so on.
The steps involved in mutations are therefore as follows (slightly simplified):
(cid:129) On receiving a request from a client, the master grants a lease to one of the replicas
(the primary) and returns the identity of the primary and other (secondary) replicas
to the client.
(cid:129) The client sends all data to the replicas, and this is stored temporarily in a buffer
cache and not written until further instruction (again, maintaining a separation of
control flow from data flow coupled with a lightweight control regime based on
leases).
(cid:129) Once all the replicas have acknowledged receipt of this data, the client sends a
write request to the primary; the primary then determines a serial order for
concurrent requests and applies updates in this order at the primary site.
(cid:129) The primary requests that the same mutations in the same order are carried out at
secondary replicas and the secondary replicas send back an acknowledgement
when the mutations have succeeded’
(cid:129) If all acknowledgements are received, the primary reports success back to the
client; otherwise, a failure is reported indicating that the mutation succeeded at the
primary and at some but not all of the replicas. This is treated as a failure and


===== page 958 =====
940 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
leaves the replicas in an inconsistent state. GFS attempts to overcome this failure
by retrying the failed mutations. In the worst case, this will not succeed and
therefore consistency is not guaranteed by the approach.
It is interesting to relate this scheme to the techniques for replication discussed in
Chapter 18. GFS adopts a passive replication architecture with an important twist. In
passive replication, updates are sent to the primary and the primary is then responsible
for sending out subsequent updates to the backup servers and ensuring they are
coordinated. In GFS, the client sends data to all the replicas but the request goes to the
primary, which is then responsible for scheduling the actual mutations (the separation
between data flow and control flow mentioned above). This allows the transmission of
large quantities of data to be optimized independently of the control flow.
In mutations, there is an important distinction between write and record append
operations. writes specify an offset at which mutations should occur, whereas record
appends do not (the mutations are applied at the end of the file wherever this might be
at a given point in time). In the former case the location is predetermined, whereas in the
latter case the system decides. Concurrent writes to the same location are not serializable
and may result in corrupted regions of the file. With record append operations, GFS
guarantees the append will happen at least once and atomically (that is, as a contiguous
sequence of bytes); the system does not guarantee, though, that all copies of the chunk
will be identical (some may have duplicate data). Again, it is helpful to relate this to the
material in Chapter 18. The replication strategies in Chapter 18 are all general-purpose,
whereas this strategy is domain-specific and weakens the consistency guarantees,
knowing the resultant semantics can be tolerated by Google applications and services (a
further example of domain-specific replication – the replication algorithm by Xu and
Liskov [1989] for tuple spaces can be found in Section 6.5.2).
21.5.2 Chubby
Chubby [Burrows 2006] is a crucial service at the heart of the Google infrastructure
offering storage and coordination services for other infrastructure services, including
GFS and Bigtable. Chubby is a multi-faceted service offering four distinct capabilities:
(cid:129) It provides coarse-grained distributed locks to synchronize distributed activities in
what is a large-scale, asynchronous environment.
(cid:129) It provides a file system offering the reliable storage of small files
(complementing the service offered by GFS).
(cid:129) It can be used to support the election of a primary in a set of replicas (as needed
for example by GFS, as discussed in Section 21.5.1 above).
(cid:129) It is used as a name service within Google.
At first sight, this might appear to contradict the overall design principle of simplicity
(doing one thing and doing it well). As we unfold the design of Chubby, however, we
will see that its heart is one core service that is offering a solution to distributed
consensus and that the other facets emerge from this core service, which is optimized for
the style of usage within Google.


===== page 959 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 941
We begin our study of Chubby by examining the interface it offers; then we look
in detail at the architecture of a Chubby system and how this maps onto the physical
architecture. We conclude the examination by looking in detail at the implementation of
the consensus algorithm at the heart of Chubby, Paxos.
Chubby interface • Chubby provides an abstraction based on a file system, taking the
view first promoted in Plan 9 [Pike et al. 1993] that every data object is a file. Files are
organized into a hierarchical namespace using directory structures with names having
the form of:
/ls/chubby_cell/directory_name/.../file_name
where/ls refers to the lock service, designating that this is part of the Chubby system,
andchubby_cell is the name of a particular instance of a Chubby system (the term cell
is used in Chubby to denote an instance of the system). This is followed by a series of
directory names culminating in a file_name. A special name, /ls/local will be resolved
to the most local cell relative to the calling application or service.
Chubby started off life as a lock service, and the intention was that everything
would be a lock in the system. However, it quickly became apparent that it would be
useful to associate (typically small) quantities of data with Chubby entities – we see an
example of this below when we look at how Chubby is used in primary elections. Thus
entities in Chubby share the functionality of locks and files; they can be used solely for
locking, to store small quantities of data or to associate small quantities of data
(effectively metadata) with locking operations.
A slightly simplified version of the API offered by Chubby is shown in Figure
21.10. Open and Close are standard operations, with Open taking a named file or
directory and returning a Chubby handle to that entity. The client can specify various
parameters associated with the Open, including declaring the intended usage (for
example, for reading, writing or locking), and permissions checks are carried out at this
stage using access control lists. Close simply relinquishes use of the handle. Delete is
used to remove the file or directory (this operation fails if applied to a directory with
children).
In the role of a file system, Chubby offers a small set of operations for whole-file
reading and writing; these are single operations that return the complete data of the file
and write the complete data of the file. This whole-file approach is adopted to discourage
the creation of large files, as this is not the intended use of Chubby. The first operation,
GetContentsAndStat, returns both the contents of the file and any metadata associated
with the file (an associated operation, GetStat, just returns the metadata; a ReadDir
operation is also provided to read names and metadata associated with children of a
directory.SetContents writes the contents of a file and SetACL provides a means to set
access control list data. The reading and writing of whole files are atomic operations.
In the role of a lock-management tool, the main operations provided are Acquire,
TryAcquire and Release.Acquire and Release correspond to the operations of the same
name as introduced in Section 16.4; TryAcquire is a non-blocking variant of Acquire.
Note that although locks are advisory in Chubby an application or service must go
through the proper protocol of acquiring and releasing locks. The developers of Chubby
did consider an alternative of mandatory locks, whereby locked data is inaccessible to
all other users and this is enforced by the system, but the extra flexibility and resilience


===== page 960 =====
942 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.10 Chubby API
Role Operation Effect
General Open Opens a given named file or directory and
returns a handle
Close Closes the file associated with the handle
Delete Deletes the file or directory
File GetContentsAndStat Returns (atomically) the whole file contents
and metadata associated with the file
GetStat Returns just the metadata
ReadDir Returns the contents of a directory – that is, the
names and metadata of any children
SetContents Writes the whole contents of a file (atomically)
SetACL Writes new access control list information
Lock Acquire Acquires a lock on a file
TryAquire Tries to acquire a lock on a file
Release Releases a lock
of advisory locks was preferred, leaving the responsibility of checking for conflicts to
the programmer [Burrows 2006].
Should an application need to protect a file from concurrent access, it can use both
the roles together, storing data in the file and acquiring locks before accessing this data.
Chubby can also be used to support a primary election in distributed systems –
that is, the election of one replica as the primary in passive replication management
(refer back to Sections 15.3 and 18.3.1 for discussions of election algorithms and passive
replication respectively). First, all candidate primaries attempt to acquire a lock
associated with the election. Only one will succeed. This candidate becomes the
primary,S with all other candidates then being secondaries. The primary records its
victory by writing its identity to the associated file, and other processes can then
determine the identity of the primary by reading this data. As mentioned above, this is a
key example of combining the roles of lock and file together for a useful purpose in a
distributed system. This also shows how primary election can be implemented on top of
a consensus service as an alternative to the algorithms such as the ring-based approach
or the bully algorithm introduced in Section 15.3.
Finally, Chubby supports a simple event mechanism enabling clients to register
when opening a file to receive event messages concerning the file. More specifically, the
client can subscribe to a range of events as an option in the Open call. The associated
events are then delivered asynchronously via callbacks. Examples of events include that
the file contents have been modified, a handle has become invalid, and so on.


===== page 961 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 943
Chubby is very much a cut-down file system programming interface compared to,
for example, POSIX. Not only does Chubby require read and update operations to apply
to whole files, but it does not support operations to move files between directories, nor
does it support symbolic or hard links. Also Chubby maintains only limited metadata
(related to access control, versioning and a checksum to protect data integrity).
Chubby architecture • As mentioned above, a single instance of a Chubby system is
known as a cell; each cell consists of a relatively small number of replicas (typically
five) with one designated as the master. Client applications access this set of replicas via
a Chubby library, which communicates with the remote servers using the RPC service
described in Section 21.4.1. The replicas are placed at failure-independent sites to
minimize the potential for correlated failures – for example, they will not be contained
within the same rack. All replicas are typically contained within a given physical cluster,
although this is not required for the correct operation of the protocol and experimental
cells have been created that span Google data centres.
Each replica maintains a small database whose elements are entities in the Chubby
namespace – that is, directories and files/locks. The consistency of the replicated
database is achieved using an underlying consensus protocol (an implementation of
Lamport’s Paxos algorithm [Lamport 1989, Lamport 1998]) that is based around
maintaining operation logs (we look at the implementation of this protocol below). As
logs can become very large over time, Chubby also supports the creation of snapshots –
complete views of system state at a given point of time. Once a snapshot is taken,
previous logs can be deleted with the consistent state of the system at any point
determined by the previous snapshot together with the applications of the set of
operations in the log. This overall structure is shown in Figure 21.11.
A Chubby session is a relationship between a client and a Chubby cell. This is
maintained using KeepAlive handshakes between the two entities. To improve
performance, the Chubby library implements client caching, storing file data, metadata
and information on open handles. In contrast to GFS (with its large, sequential reads and
appends), client caching is effective in Chubby with its small files that are likely to be
accessed repeatedly. Because of this caching, the system must maintain consistency
between a file and a cache as well as between the different replicas of the file. The
required cache consistency in Chubby is achieved as follows. Whenever a mutation is to
occur, the associated operation (for example, SetContents) is blocked until all associated
caches are invalidated (for efficiency, the invalidation requests are piggybacked onto
KeepAlive replies from the master with the replies sent immediately when an
invalidation occurs). Cached data is also never updated directly.
The end result is a very simple protocol for cache consistency that delivers
deterministic semantics to Chubby clients. Contrast this with the client caching regime
in NFS, for example, where mutations do not result in the immediate updating of cached
copies, resulting in potentially different versions of files on different client nodes. It is
also interesting to compare this with the cache consistency protocol in AFS, but we leave
that as an exercise to the reader (see Exercise 21.7).
This determinism is important for many of the client applications and services that
use Chubby (for example, Bigtable, as discussed in Section 21.5.3) to store access
control lists. Bigtable requires consistent update of access control lists, across all
replicas and in terms of cached copies. Note that it is this determinism that led to the use


===== page 962 =====
944 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.11 Overall architecture of Chubby
Chubby cell
Client
Log
Local
Chubby data-
client library Snapshots base
*
Log
Local
data-
Snapshots base
•
•
•
Log
Local
data-
* denotes current master Snapshots base
of Chubby as a name server within Google. We mentioned in Section 13.2.3 that the
DNS allows naming data to become inconsistent. While this is tolerable in the Internet,
the developers of the Google infrastructure preferred the more consistent view offered
by Chubby, using Chubby files to maintain name to address mappings. Burrows [2006]
discusses this use of Chubby as a name service in more detail.
Implementing Paxos • Paxos is a family of protocols providing distributed consensus
(see Section 15.5 for a wider discussion of distributed consensus protocols). Consensus
protocols operate over a set of replicas with the goal of reaching agreement between the
servers managing the replicas to update to a common value. This is achieved in an
environment where:
(cid:129) Replica servers may operate at an arbitrary speed and may fail (and subsequently
recover).
(cid:129) Replicaservers have access to stable, persistent storage that survives crashes.
(cid:129) Messages may be lost, reordered or duplicated. They are delivered without
corruption but may take an arbitrarily long time to be delivered.
Paxos is therefore fundamentally a distributed consensus protocol for asynchronous
systems (see Section 2.4.1) and indeed is the dominant offering in this space. The
developers of Chubby stress that the above assumptions reflect the true nature of


===== page 963 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 945
Internet-based systems such as Google and caution practitioners about consensus
algorithms that make stronger assumptions (for example, algorithms for synchronous
systems) [Burrows 2006].
Recall from Chapter 15 that it is impossible to guarantee consistency in
asynchronous systems but that various techniques have been proposed to work around
this result. Paxos works by ensuring correctness but not liveness – that is, Paxos is not
guaranteed to terminate (we return to this issue below once we have looked at the details
of the algorithm).
The algorithm was first introduced by Leslie Lamport in 1989 in a paper called
The Part-Time Parliament, [Lamport 1989, Lamport 1998]. Inspired by his description
of Byzantine Generals (as discussed in Section 15.5.1), he again presented the algorithm
with reference to an analogy, this time referring to behaviour of a mythical parliament
on the Greek island of Paxos. Lamport writes amusingly about the reaction to this
presentation on his web site [research.microsoft.com].
In the algorithm, any replica can submit a value with the goal of achieving
consensus on a final value. In Chubby, agreement equates to all replicas having this
value as the next entry in their update logs, thus achieving a consistent view of the logs
across all sites. The algorithm is guaranteed to eventually achieve consensus if a
majority of the replicas run for long enough with sufficient network stability. More
formally, Kirsch and Amir [2008] present the following liveness properties for Paxos:
Paxos-L1 (Progress): If there exists a stable majority set of servers, then if a server
in the set initiates an update, some member of the set eventually executes the update.
Paxos-L2 (Eventual Replication): If server s executes an update and there exists a
set of servers containing sandr, and a time after which the set does not experience
any communication or process failures, then reventually executes the update.
The intuition here is that the algorithm cannot guarantee to reach consistency when the
network behaves asynchronously but will eventually reach consistency when more
synchronous (or stable) conditions are experienced.
The Paxos algorithm: The Paxos algorithm proceeds as follows:
Step 1: The algorithm relies on an ability to elect a coordinator for a given consensus
decision. Recognizing that coordinators can fail, a flexible election process is
adopted that can result in multiple coordinators coexisting, old and new, with the goal
of recognizing and rejecting messages from old coordinators. To identify the right
coordinator, an ordering is given to coordinators through the attachment of a
sequence number. Each replica maintains the highest sequence number seen so far
and, if bidding to be a coordinator, will pick a higher unique number and broadcast
this to all replicas in a propose message.
It is clearly important that the sequence number picked by a potential
coordinator is indeed unique, two (or more) coordinators must not be able to pick the
same value. Let us assume we have n replicas. A unique sequence number can be
guaranteed if every replica is assigned a unique identifier, i r, between 0 and n–1, and
then selects the smallest sequence number s that is larger than any sequence numbers
seen so far, so that s mod n=i r(for example, if the number of replicas is 5, we look
at the replica with unique identifier 3 and the last sequence number seen was 20, then
this replica will pick a sequence number of 23 for its next bid).


===== page 964 =====
946 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
If other replicas have not seen a higher bidder, they either reply with a promise
message indicating that they promise to not deal with other (that is, older)
coordinators with lower sequence numbers, or they send a negative
acknowledgement indicating they will not vote for this coordinator. Each promise
message also contains the most recent value the sender has heard as a proposal for
consensus; this value may be null if no other proposals have been observed. If a
majority of promise messages are received, the receiving replica is elected as a
coordinator, with the majority of replicas supporting this coordinator known as the
quorum.
Step 2: The elected coordinator must select a value and subsequently send an accept
message with this value to the associated quorum. If any of the promise messages
contained a value, then the coordinator must pick a value (any value) from the set of
values it has received; otherwise, the coordinator is free to select its own value. Any
member of the quorum that receives the accept message must accept the value and
then acknowledge the acceptance. The coordinator waits, possibly indefinitely in the
algorithm, for a majority of replicas to acknowledge the accept message.
Step 3: If a majority of replicas do acknowledge, then a consensus has effectively
been achieved. The coordinator then broadcasts a commit message to notify replicas
of this agreement. If not, then the coordinator abandons the proposal and starts again.
Note that the terminology above is that used by Google, for example in Chandra et al.
[2007]. In the literature, descriptions of the protocol may use other terminology, for
example based around the roles of proposers, acceptors, learners and so on.
In the absence of failure, consensus is therefore achieved with the message
exchanges shown in Figure 21.12. The algorithm is also safe in the presence of failures
– for example, the failure of a coordinator or of another replica or problems with lost,
reordered or duplicated or delayed messages, as discussed above. A proof of correctness
is beyond the scope of this book but relies heavily on the ordering imposed by step 1
coupled with the fact that, because of the quorum mechanism, if two majorities have
agreed on a proposed value there must be at least one replica in common that agreed to
both. The quorum mechanism also ensures correct behaviour if the network partitions,
since only at most one partition is able to construct a majority.
Returning to the issue of termination, it is possible for Paxos to fail to terminate if
two proposers compete against each other and indefinitely outbid each other in terms of
higher and higher sequence numbers. This is consistent with the impossibility result of
Fischer et al. [1985] concerning absolute guarantees of consensus in asynchronous
systems.
Additional implementation issues: In Chubby, it is not sufficient to reach agreement on a
single value; there is a need to reach agreement on a sequence of values. In practice the
algorithm must therefore repeat to agree a set of entries in the log. This is referred to as
Multi-Paxos by Chandra et al. [2007]. In Multi-Paxos certain optimizations are possible,
including the election of a coordinator for a (potentially long) period of time thus
avoiding repeated executions of step 1.
The paper by Chandra et al. also discusses the engineering challenges of
implementing Paxos in a real-world setting, and in particular in the complex distributed
system setting offered by the Google infrastructure. In this entertaining and instructive


===== page 965 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 947
Figure 21.12 Message exchanges in Paxos (in absence of failures)
Step 1: electing a coordinator
Propose (seq_number)
Coordinator Replicas
Promise
Step 2: seeking consensus
Accept (value)
Coordinator Replicas
Acknowledgement
Step 3: achieving consensus
Commit
Coordinator Replicas
paper, they discuss the challenges of moving from algorithmic description and formal
proof to making the algorithm operate effectively as part of the Chubby system,
including dealing with disk corruptions and other contextual events such as system
upgrades. The paper emphasizes the importance of a stringent testing regime, especially
for such key building blocks of fault-tolerant systems, resonating with the overall
Google principle of extensive testing mentioned in Section 21.3.


===== page 966 =====
948 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
21.5.3 Bigtable
GFS offers a system for storing and accessing large ‘flat’ files whose content is accessed
relative to byte offsets within a file, allowing programs to store large quantities of data
and perform read and write (especially append) operations optimized for the typical use
within the organization. While this is an important building block, it is not sufficient to
meet all of Google’s data needs. There is a strong need for a distributed storage system
that provides access to data that is indexed in more sophisticated ways related to its
content and structure. Web search and nearly all of the other Google applications,
including the crawl infrastructure, Google Earth/Maps, Google Analytics and
personalized search, use structured data access. Google Analytics, for example, stores
information on raw clicks associated with users visiting a web site in one table and
summarizes the analyzed information in a second table. The former is around 200
terabytes in size and the latter 20 terabytes. (The analysis is carried out using
MapReduce, described in Section 21.6 below.)
One choice for Google would be to implement (or reuse) a distributed database,
for example a relational database with a full set of relational operators provided (for
example, union, selection, projection, intersection and join). But the achievement of
good performance and scalability in such distributed databases is recognized as a
difficult problem and, crucially, the styles of application offered by Google do not
demand this full functionality. Google therefore has introduced Bigtable [Chang et al.
2008], which retains the table model offered by relational databases but with a much
simpler interface suitable for the style of application and service offered by Google and
also designed to support the efficient storage and retrieval of quite massive structured
datasets. We describe this interface in some detail below before looking at the internal
architecture of Bigtable, highlighting how these properties are achieved.
Bigtable interface • Bigtable is a distributed storage system that supports the storage of
potentially vast volumes of structured data. The name is strongly indicative of what it
offers, providing storage for what are very big tables (often in the terabyte range). More
precisely, Bigtable supports the fault-tolerant storage, creation and deletion of tables
where a given table is a three-dimensional structure containing cells indexed by a row
key, a column key and a timestamp:
Rows: Each row in a table has an associated row key that is an arbitrary string of up
to 64 kilobytes in size, although most keys are significantly smaller. A row key is
mapped by Bigtable to the address of a row. A given row contains potentially large
amounts of data about a given entity such as a web page. Given that it is common
within Google to process information about web pages, it is quite common, for
example, for row keys to be URLs with the row then containing information about
the resources referenced by the URLs. Bigtable maintains a lexicographic ordering
of a given table by row key, and this has some interesting repercussions. In particular,
as we will see below when we examine the underlying architecture, subsequences of
rows map onto tablets, which are the unit of distribution and placement. Hence it is
beneficial to manage locality by assigning row keys that will be close or even
adjacent in the lexicographic order. This implies that URLs may make bad key
choices, but URLs with the domain portion reversed will provide much stronger
locality for data accesses because common domains will be sorted together,


===== page 967 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 949
supporting domain analyses. To illustrate this, consider information stored on the
BBC web site related to sport. If such information is stored under URLs such as
www.bbc.co.uk/sports and www.bbc.co.uk/football, then the resultant sort will be
rather random and dominated by the lexicographic order of early fields. If, however,
it is stored under uk.co.bbc.www/sport and uk.co.bbc.www/football, the related
information is likely to be stored in the same tablet. It should be stressed that this key
assignment is left entirely to the programmer so they must be aware of this (ordering)
property to exploit the system optimally. To deal with concurrency issues, all
accesses to rows are atomic (echoing similar design decisions in GFS and Chubby).
Columns: The naming of columns is more structured than that of rows. Columns are
organized into a number of column families – logical groupings where the data under
a family tends to be of the same type, with individual columns designated by
qualifiers within families. In other words, a given column is referred to using the
syntax family:qualifier,wherefamily is a printable string and qualifier is an arbitrary
string. The intended use is to have a relatively small number of families for a given
table but a potentially large number of columns (designated by distinct qualifiers)
within a family. Using the example from Chang et al. [2008], this can be used to
structure data associated with web pages, with valid families being the contents, any
anchors associated with the page and the language that is used in the web page. If a
family name refers to just one column it is possible to omit the qualifier. For example,
a web page will have one contents field, and this can be referred to using the key
name contents:.
Timestamps: Any given cell within Bigtable can also have multiple versions indexed
by timestamp, where the timestamp is either related to real time or can be an arbitrary
value assigned by the programmer (for example, a logical time, as discussed in
Section 14.4, or a version identifier). The various versions are sorted by reverse
timestamp with the most recent version available first. This facility can be used, for
example, to store different versions of the same data, including the content of web
pages, allowing analyses to be carried out over historical data as well as the current
data. Tables can be set up to apply garbage collection on older versions
automatically, therefore reducing the burden on the programmer to manage the large
datasets and associated versions. This three-dimensional table abstraction is
illustrated in Figure 21.13.
Bigtable supports an API that provides a wide range of operations, including:
(cid:129) the creation and deletion of tables;
(cid:129) the creation and deletion of column families within tables;
(cid:129) accessing data from given rows;
(cid:129) writing or deleting cell values;
(cid:129) carrying out atomic row mutations including data accesses and associated write
and delete operations (more global, cross-row transactions are not supported);
(cid:129) iterating over different column families, including the use of regular expressions
to identify column ranges;
(cid:129) associating metadata such as access control information with tables and column
families.


===== page 968 =====
950 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.13 The table abstraction in Bigtable
Column families and qualifiers
CF1: CF2:q1 CF2:q2 CF3:q1 CF3:q2
R1
t=10
R2 t=7 timestamps
t=3
Rows
R3
R4
R5
As can be seen, Bigtable is considerably simpler than a relational database but well
suited to the styles of application within Google. Chang et al.discuss how this interface
supports the storage of tables of data on web pages (where the rows represent individual
web pages and the columns represent data and metadata associated with that given web
page), the storage of both raw and processed data for Google Earth (with rows
representing geographical segments and columns being different images available for
that segment), and also data to support Google Analytics (for example, maintaining a
raw click table where rows represent an end user session and columns the associated
activity).
The overall architecture of the underlying system is presented below.
Bigtable architecture • A Bigtable is broken up into tablets, with a given tablet being
approximately 100–200 megabytes in size. The main tasks of the Bigtable infrastructure
are therefore to manage tablets and to support the operations described above for
accessing and changing the associated structured data. The implementation also has the
task of mapping the tablet structure onto the underlying file system (GFS) and ensuring
effective load balancing across the system. As we shall see below, Bigtable makes heavy
use of both GFS and Chubby for the storage of data and distributed coordination.
A single instance of a Bigtable implementation is known as a cluster, and each
cluster can store a number of tables. The architecture of a Bigtable cluster is similar to
that of GFS, consisting of three major components (as shown in Figure 21.14):
(cid:129) alibrary component on the client side;
(cid:129) amaster server;
(cid:129) a potentially large number of tablet servers.


===== page 969 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 951
Figure 21.14 Overall architecture of Bigtable
Client
Bigtable
client library Bigtable
master
Monitoring,
tablet allocation,
garbage collection
Row access
Tablet ..... Tablet
server server
In terms of scale, Chang et al. report that, as of 2008, 388 production clusters ran across
multiple Google machine clusters, with an average of around 63 tablet servers per
cluster but with many being significantly larger (some with more than 500 tablet servers
per cluster). The number of tablet servers per cluster is also dynamic, and it is common
to add new tablet servers to the system at runtime to increase throughput.
Two of the key design decisions in Bigtable are identical to those made for GFS.
Firstly, Bigtable adopts a single master approach, for exactly the same reasons – that is,
to maintain a centralized view of the state of the system thus supporting optimal
placement and load-balancing decisions and because of the inherent simplicity in
implementing this approach. Secondly, the implementation maintains a strict separation
between control and data with a lightweight control regime maintained by the master
and data access entirely through appropriate tablet servers, with the master not involved
at this stage (to ensure maximum throughput when accessing large datasets by
interacting directly with the tablet servers). In particular, the control tasks associated
with the master are as follows:
(cid:129) monitoringthe status of tablet servers and reacting to both the availability of new
tablet servers and the failure of existing ones;
(cid:129) assigning tablets to tablet servers and ensuring effective load balancing;
(cid:129) garbage collection of the underlying files stored in GFS.
Bigtable goes further than GFS in that the master is not involved in the core task of
mapping tablets onto the underlying persistent data (which is, as mentioned above,
stored in GFS). This means that Bigtable clients do not have to communicate with the
master at all (compare this with the open operation in GFS, which does involve the
master), a design decision that significantly reduces the load on the master and the
possibility of the master becoming a bottleneck.
We now look at how Bigtable uses GFS for storing its data and uses Chubby in
rather innovative ways for implementing monitoring and load balancing.


===== page 970 =====
952 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.15 The storage architecture in Bigtable
Held in main Memtable Merge Read
memory
Write through
Persistent log
Held in GFS
Write SSTable files
Data storage in Bigtable: The mapping of tables in Bigtable onto GFS involves several
stages, as summarized below:
(cid:129) A table is split into multiple tablets by dividing the table up by row, taking a row
range up to a size of around 100–200 megabytes and mapping this onto a tablet.
A given table will therefore consist of multiple tablets depending on its size. As
tables grow, extra tablets will be added.
(cid:129) Each tablet is represented by a storage structure that consists of set of files that
store data in a particular format (the SSTable) together with other storage
structures implementing logging.
(cid:129) The mapping from tablets to SSTables is provided by a hierarchical index scheme
inspired by B+-trees.
We look at the storage representation and mapping in more detail below.
The precise storage representation of a tablet in Bigtable is shown in Figure 21.15.
The main unit of storage in Bigtable is the SSTable (a file format that is also used
elsewhere in the Google infrastructure). An SSTable is organized as an ordered and
immutable map from keys to values, with both being arbitrary strings. Operations are
provided to efficiently read the value associated with a given key and to iterate over a
set of values in a given key range. The index of an SSTable is written at the end of the
SSTable file and read into memory when an SSTable is accessed. This means that a
given entry can be read with a single disk read. An entire SSTable can optionally be
stored in main memory.
A given tablet is represented by a number of SSTables. Rather than performing
mutations directly on SSTables, writes are first committed to a log to support recovery
(see Chapter 17), with the log also held in GFS. The log entries are written through to
thememtable held in main memory. The SSTables therefore act as a snapshot of the state


===== page 971 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 953
of a tablet and, on failure, recovery is implemented by replaying the most recent log
entries since the last snapshot. Reads are serviced by providing a merged view of the
data from the SSTables combined with the memtable. Different levels of compaction are
performed on this data structure to maintain efficient operation, as reported in Chang et
al. [2008]. Note that SSTables can also be compressed to reduce the storage
requirements of particular tables in Bigtable. Users can specify whether tables are to be
compressed and also the compression algorithm to be used.
As mentioned above, the master is not involved in the mapping from tables to
stored data. Rather, this is managed by traversing an index based on the concept of B+-
trees (a form of B-tree where all the actual data is held in leaf nodes, with other nodes
containing indexing data and metadata).
A Bigtable client seeking the location of a tablet starts the search by looking up a
particular file in Chubby that is known to hold the location of a root tablet – that is, a
tablet containing the root index of the tree structure. This root tablet contains metadata
about other tablets – specifically about other metadata tablets, which in turn contain the
location of the actual data tablets. The root tablet together with the other metadata tablets
form a metadata table, with the only distinction being that the entries in the root tablet
contain metadata about metadata tablets, which in turn contain metadata about the actual
data tablets. With this scheme, the depth of the tree is limited to three. The entries in the
metadata table map portions of tablets onto location information, including information
about the storage representation for this tablet (including the set of SSTables and the
associated log).
This overall structure is represented in Figure 21.16. To shortcut this three-level
hierarchy, clients cache location information and also prefetched metadata associated
with other tables when accessing the data structure.
Monitoring: Bigtable uses Chubby in a rather interesting way to monitor tablet servers.
Bigtable maintains a directory in Chubby containing files representing each of the
available tablet servers. When a new tablet server comes along, it creates a new file in
this directory and, crucially, obtains an exclusive lock on this file. The existence of this
file acts as the flag that the tablet server is fully operational and ready to be assigned
tablets by the master, with the lock providing a means of communication between the
two parties:
From the tablet server side: every tablet server monitors its exclusive lock and, if this
is lost, it stops serving its tablets. This is most likely due to a network partition that
compromises the Chubby session. The tablet server will attempt to reacquire the
exclusive lock if the file still exists (see below), and if the file disappears, the server
terminates itself. If a server terminates for another reason, for example because it is
informed that its machine is needed for another purpose, the tablet server can
surrender its exclusive lock, thus triggering a reassignment.
From the master side: the master periodically requests the status of the lock. If the
lock is lost or if a tablet server does not respond, then clearly there is a problem either
with the tablet server or with Chubby. The master attempts to acquire the lock, and if
it succeeds it can infer that Chubby is alive and that the problem rests with the tablet
server. The master then deletes the file from the directory, which will result in the
tablet server terminating itself if it has not already failed. The master then must
reassign all of that server’s tablets to alternative tablet servers.


===== page 972 =====
954 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.16 The hierarchical indexing scheme adopted by Bigtable
User tablets
Other metadata tablets
Root tablet
(1st metadata tablet)
Chubby file
The rationale is to reuse Chubby, which is a well-tested and reliable service, to achieve
the extra level of monitoring rather than providing a specific monitoring service
specifically for this purpose.
Load balancing: To assign tablets, the master must map the available tablets in the cluster
to appropriate tablet servers. From the algorithm above, the master has an accurate list
of tablet servers that are ready and willing to host tablets and a list of all the tablets
associated with the cluster. The master also maintains the current mapping information
together with a list of unassigned tablets (which is populated, for example, when a tablet
server is removed from the system). By having this global view of the system, the master
ensures unassigned tablets are assigned to appropriate tablet servers based on responses
to load requests, updating the mapping information accordingly.
Note that a master also has an exclusive lock of its own (the master lock), and if
this is lost due to the Chubby session being compromised, the master must terminate
itself (again, reusing Chubby to implement additional functionality). This does not stop
access to data but rather prevents control operations from proceeding. Bigtable is
therefore still available at this stage. When the master restarts, it must retrieve the
current status. It does this by first creating a new file and obtaining the exclusive lock
ensuring it is the only master in the cluster, and then working through the directory to
find tablet servers, requesting information on tablet assignments from the tablet servers
and also building a list of all tablets under its responsibility to infer unassigned tablets.
The master then proceeds with its normal operation.


===== page 973 =====
SECTION 21.5 DATA STORAGE AND COORDINATION SERVICES 955
Figure 21.17 Summary of design choices related to data storage and coordination
Element Design choice Rationale Trade-offs
GFS The use of a large Suited to the size of files in GFS; Would be very inefficient
chunk size (64 efficient for large sequential for random access to small
megabytes) reads and appends; minimizes the parts of files
amount of metadata
The use of a The master maintains a global Single point of failure
centralized master view that informs management (mitigated by maintaining
decisions; simpler to implement replicas of operations logs)
Separation of control High-performance file access Complicates the client
and data flows with minimal master library as it must deal with
involvement both the master and
chunkservers
Relaxed consistency High performance, exploiting Data may be inconsistent,
model semantics of the GFS operations in particular duplicated
Chubby Combined lock and Multipurpose, for example Need to understand and
file abstraction supporting elections differentiate between
different facets
Whole-file reading Very efficient for small files Inappropriate for large
and writing files
Client caching with Deterministic semantics Overhead of maintaining
strict consistency strict consistency
Bigtable The use of a table Supports structured data Less expressive than a
abstraction efficiently relational database
The use of a As above, master has a global Single point of failure;
centralized master view; simpler to implement possible bottleneck
Separation of control High-performance data access -
and data flows with minimal master
involvement
Emphasis on Ability to support very large Overhead associated with
monitoring and load numbers of parallel clients maintaining global states
balancing
21.5.4 Summary of key design choices
The overall design choices relating to data storage and coordination services are
summarized in Figure 21.17.
The most striking feature emerging from this analysis is the design choice of
providing three separate services that individually are relatively simple and targeted


===== page 974 =====
956 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
towards a given style of usage but together provide excellent coverage for the needs of
Google applications and services. This is most evident from the complementary styles
offered by GFS and Chubby, with Bigtable then providing structured data building on
the services offered by both the underlying services. This design choice also echoes the
approach adopted for communication paradigms (see Section 21.4.3) whereby multiple
techniques are offered, each optimized for the intended style of application.
21.6 Distributed computation services
To complement the storage and coordination services, it is also important to support
high-performance distributed computation over the large datasets stored in GFS and
Bigtable. The Google infrastructure supports distributed computation through the
MapReduce service and also the higher-level Sawzall language. We look at MapReduce
in detail and then briefly examine the key features of the Sawzall language.
21.6.1 MapReduce
Given the huge datasets in use at Google, it is a strong requirement to be able to carry
out distributed computation by breaking up the data into smaller fragments and carrying
out analyses of such fragments in parallel, making use of the computational resources
offered by the physical architecture described in Section 21.3.1. Such analyses include
common tasks such as sorting, searching and constructing inverted indexes (indexes that
contain a mapping from words to locations in different files, this being key in
implementing search functions). MapReduce [Dean and Ghemawat 2008] is a simple
programming model to support the development of such applications, hiding underlying
detail from the programmer including details related to the parallelization of the
computation, monitoring and recovery from failure, data management and load
balancing onto the underlying physical infrastructure.
We look at details of the programming model offered by MapReduce before
examining how the system is implemented.
MapReduce interface • The key principle behind MapReduce is the recognition that
many parallel computations share the same overall pattern – that is:
(cid:129) break the input data into a number of chunks;
(cid:129) carry out initial processing on these chunks of data to produce intermediary
results;
(cid:129) combine the intermediary results to produce the final output.
The specification of the associated algorithm can then be expressed in terms of two
functions, one to carry out the initial processing and the second to produce the final
results from the intermediary values. It is then possible to support multiple styles of
computation by providing different implementations of these two functions. Crucially,
by factoring out these two functions, the rest of the functionality can be shared across
the different computations, thus achieving huge reductions in complexity in
constructing such applications.


===== page 975 =====
SECTION 21.6 DISTRIBUTED COMPUTATION SERVICES 957
More specifically, MapReduce specifies a distributed computation in terms of two
functions, map and reduce(an approach partially influenced by the design of functional
programming languages such as Lisp, which provide functions of the same name,
although in functional programming the motivation is not parallel computation):
(cid:129) map takes a set of key-value pairs as input and produces a set of intermediary key-
value pairs as output.
(cid:129) The intermediary pairs are then sorted by key value so that all intermediary results
are ordered by intermediary key. This is broken up into groups and passed to
reduce instances, which carry out their processing to produce a list of values for
each group (for some computations, this could be a single value).
To illustrate the operation of MapReduce, let us consider a simple example. In section
21.2, we illustrated the various aspects of a web search for ‘distributed systems book’
Let us simplify this further by just searching for this complete string – that is, a search
for the phrase ‘distributed systems book’ as it appears in a large body of content such as
the crawled contents of the Web. In this example, the map and reduce functions would
perform the following tasks:
(cid:129) Assuming it is supplied with a web page name and its contents as input, the map
function searches linearly through the contents, emitting a key-value pair
consisting of (say) the phrase followed by the name of the web document
containing this phrase wherever it finds the strings ‘distributed’ followed by
‘system’ followed by ‘book’ (the example can be extended to also emit a position
within the document).
(cid:129) The reduce function is in this case is trivial, simply emitting the intermediary
results ready to be collated together into a complete index.
The MapReduce implementation is responsible for breaking the data into chunks,
creating multiple instances of the map and reduce functions, allocating and activating
them on available machines in the physical infrastructure, monitoring the computations
for any failures and implementing appropriate recovery strategies, despatching
intermediary results and ensuring optimal performance of the whole system.
With this approach, it is possible to make significant savings in terms of lines of
code by reusing the underlying MapReduce framework. For example, Google
reimplemented the main production indexing system in 2003 and reduced the number of
lines of C++ code in MapReduce from 3,800 to 700 – a significant reduction, albeit in a
relatively small system. This also results in other key benefits, including making it easier
to update algorithms as there is a clean separation of concerns between what is
effectively the application logic and the associated management of the distributed
computation (a similar principle to the separation of concerns intrinsic to container-
based systems, as reported in Section 8.4). In addition, improvements to the underlying
MapReduce implementation immediately benefit all MapReduce applications. The
downside is a more prescriptive framework, albeit one that can be customized by
specifying the map and reduce and indeed other functions, as will become apparent
below.


===== page 976 =====
958 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.18 Examples of the use of MapReduce
Function Initial step Map phase Intermediate step Reduce phase
Word count For each occurrence of For each word in
word in data partition, the intermediary
emit <word, 1> set, count the
number of 1s
Grep Output a line if it Null
matches a given pattern
Sort Partition data For each entry in the Merge/sort all Null
N.B. This into fixed-size input data, output the key-value keys
relies heavily chunks for key-value pairs to be according to their
on the processing sorted intermediary key
intermediate
step
Inverted Parse the associated For each word,
index documents and output produce a list of
a <word, document (sorted)
ID> pair wherever that document IDs
word exists
To further illustrate the use of MapReduce, we provide in Figure 21.18 a set of
examples of common functions and how they would be implemented using map and
reduce functions. The shared steps in the computation performed by the MapReduce
framework are also shown for completeness. Further details of these examples can be
found in Dean and Ghemawat [2004].
MapReduce architecture • MapReduce is implemented by a library that, as mentioned
above, hides the details associated with parallelization and distribution and allows the
programmer to focus on specifying the map and reduce functions. This library is built
on top of other aspects of the Google infrastructure, in particular using RPC for
communication and GFS for the storage of intermediary values. It is also common for
MapReduce to take its input data from Bigtable and produce a table as a result, for
example as with the Google Analytics example mentioned above (Section 21.5.3).
The overall execution of a MapReduce program is captured in Figure 21.19 which
shows the key phases involved in execution:
(cid:129) The first stage is to split the input file into M pieces, with each piece being
typically 16–64 megabytes in size (therefore no bigger than a single chunk in
GFS). The actual size is tunable by the programmer and therefore the programmer
is able to optimize this for the particular parallel processing to follow. The key
space associated with the intermediary results is also partitioned into R pieces
using a (programmable) partition function. The overall computation therefore
involves Mmap executions and Rreduce executions.


===== page 977 =====
SECTION 21.6 DISTRIBUTED COMPUTATION SERVICES 959
Figure 21.19 The overall execution of a MapReduce program
Master
Map Reduce
Intermediary results
Input data
Worker
Worker
Results
Worker
(written to file)
• . •
• . • Worker
• •
Worker
(cid:129) The MapReduce library then starts a set of worker machines (workers) from the
pool available in the cluster, with one being designated as the master and others
being used for executing map or reduce steps. The number of workers is normally
much less than M+R. For example, Dean and Ghemawat [2008] report on typical
figures of M=200,000, R=5000 with 2000 worker machines allocated to the task.
The goal of the master is to monitor the state of workers and allocate idle workers
to tasks, the execution of map or reduce functions. More precisely, the master
keeps track of the status of map and reduce tasks in terms of being idle, in-
progress or completed and also maintains information on the location of
intermediary results for passing to workers allocated a reduce task.
(cid:129) A worker that has been assigned a map task will first read the contents of the input
file allocated to that map task, extract the key-value pairs and supply them as input
to the map function. The output of the map function is a processed set of key/value
pairs that are held in an intermediary buffer. As the input data is stored in GFS,
the file will be replicated on (say) three machines. The master attempts to allocate
a worker on one of these three machines to ensure locality and minimize the use
of network bandwidth. If this is not possible, a machine near the data will be
selected.
(cid:129) The intermediary buffers are periodically written to a file local to the map
computation. At this stage, the data are partitioned according to the partition
function, resulting in R regions. This partition function, which is crucial to the
operation of MapReduce, can be specified by the programmer, but the default is
to perform a hash function on the key and then apply modulo R to the hashed value
to produce R partitions, with the end result that intermediary results are grouped
according to the hash value. Dean and Ghemawat [2004] provide the alternative


===== page 978 =====
960 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
example where keys are URLs and the programmer wants to group intermediary
results by the associated host: hash(Hostname(key)) mod R. The master is notified
when partitioning has completed and is then able to request the execution of
associated reduce functions.
(cid:129) When a worker is assigned to carry out a reduce function, it reads its
corresponding partition from the local disk of the map workers using RPC. This
data is sorted by the MapReduce library ready for processing by the reduce
function. Once sorting is completed, the reduce worker steps through the key-
value pairs in the partition applying the reduce function to produce an
accumulated result set, which is then written to an output file. This continues until
all keys in the partition are processed.
Achieving fault tolerance: The MapReduce implementation provides a strong level of
fault tolerance, in particular guaranteeing that if the map and reduce operations are
deterministic with respect to their inputs (that is they always produce the same outputs
for a given set of inputs), then the overall MapReduce task will produce the same output
as a sequential execution of the program, even in the face of failures.
To deal with failure, the master sends a ping message periodically to check that a
worker is alive and carrying out its intended operation. If no response is received, it is
assumed that the worker has failed and this is recorded by the master. The subsequent
action then depends on whether the task executing was a map or a reduce task:
(cid:129) If the worker was executing a map task, this task is marked as idle, implying it will
then be rescheduled. This happens irrespective of whether the associated task is in
progress or completed. Remember that results are stored on local disks, and hence
if the machine has failed the results will be inaccessible.
(cid:129) If the worker was executing a reduce task, this task is marked as idle only if it was
still in progress; if it is completed, the results will be available as they are written
to the global (and replicated) file system.
Note that to achieve the desired semantics, it is important that the outputs from map and
reduce tasks are written atomically, a property ensured by the MapReduce library in
cooperation with the underlying file system. Details of how this is achieved can be found
in Dean and Ghemawat [2008].
MapReduce also implements a strategy to deal with workers that may be taking a
long time to complete (known as stragglers). Google has observed that it is relatively
common for some workers to run slowly, for example because of a faulty disk that may
perform badly due to a number of error-correction steps involved in data transfers. To
deal with this, when a program execution is close to completion, the master routinely
starts backup workers for all remaining in-progress tasks. The associated tasks are
marked as completed when either the original or the new worker completes. This is
reported as having a significant impact on completion times, again circumventing the
problem of working with commodity machines that can and do fail.
As mentioned above, MapReduce is designed to operate together with Bigtable in
processing large volumes of structured data. Indeed, within Google it is common to find
applications that use a mix of all the infrastructural elements. In the box on page 961,
we describe the support provided to the Google Maps and Google Earth applications by
MapReduce, Bigtable and GFS.


===== page 979 =====
SECTION 21.6 DISTRIBUTED COMPUTATION SERVICES 961
Supporting Google Maps and Google Earth
Client programs for Google Maps [maps.google.com] and Google Earth
[earth.google.com] rely on the availability of huge sets of image tiles for loading by
the clients from Google servers. Image tiles are square arrays of pixel values
containing rendered images of geographic features and are organized in layers
holding different types of geographic features. A base layer of tiles showing a street
map is built from an up-to-date geographic database and another layer is built from
scaled satellite and aerial images showing physical characteristics of the Earth’s
surface. Other partially transparent layers are also held and can be called up to show
public transport networks and other infrastructure features, elevation contours and
even real-time traffic flows. The tile sets for each layer cover the Earth’s entire land
surface and are replicated to show different levels of detail at up to 20 zoom levels
(i.e., scales).
Much of the basic geographic data changes only slowly, but data defining new
and changed roads and other physical infrastructure becomes available all the time
and the consequent regeneration of tile sets calls for a high-performance distributed
application running on Google servers that converts geographic vectors, points and
raw image data to tiles. The implementation makes heavy use of Bigtable to store the
underlying data. The basic geographic data is stored in an XML format known as
Keyhole Markup Language or KML ( Keyhole being the name of the company that
first developed the software, acquired by Google in 2004). Raw vector and image
data are received in many formats and resolutions from a variety of sources,
including satellite and airborne imagery, and are stored with KML metadata in a
single table where the rows represent particular geographical locations and the
columns represent different geographic features and raw images, organized in
families of columns. The naming scheme for rows ensures that physical features that
are close together are stored in adjacent rows so that the data needed to generate each
tile will lie in one tablet, or not more than a small number of them. This table is
around 70 terabytes in size and has nine billion cells. It is relatively sparse as there
are normally few features or images per geographical location.
Data are continually added to the table as more geographic data and imagery
become available. At selected time points, the addition of data is suspended and a tile
update begins. A set of concurrent Map processes (as in MapReduce) work on the
raw data to transform and correct all the georeferencing coordinates for the flat
presentation of the data and to blend the images together. This Map stage generates
a table structure containing locally sorted geographic data that is passed to a set of
concurrent Reduce processes that render tiles as raster images. The entire
MapReduce task takes around 8 hours to generate a complete set of tiles processing
raw data at around 1 megabyte per second [Chang et al. 2008].
The resultant image tiles are stored in GFS, with an associated index stored in
another table in Bigtable. This table is heavily replicated across hundreds of tablet
servers on clusters at several data centres, thus enabling it to serve the very large
numbers of concurrent users of Google Maps and Google Earth. The index is around
500 gigabytes in size and significant portions are held in main memory, reducing the
latency associated with reads.


===== page 980 =====
962 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
Figure 21.20 The overall execution of a Sawzall program
Raw data
Filter
Filter Aggregator
Results
Filter
Emitted data
21.6.2 Sawzall
Sawzall [Pike et al. 2005] is an interpreted programming language for performing
parallel data analysis over very large datasets in highly distributed environments such as
that provided by the physical The Google infrastructure. Although MapReduce readily
supports the construction of such highly parallel and distributed programs, the goal of
Sawzall is to simplify the construction of such programs. This is borne out in practice,
with Sawzall programs often being 10 to 20 times smaller than the equivalent programs
written for MapReduce [Pike et al. 2005]. The implementation of the Sawzall language
builds on much of the existing The Google infrastructure, making use of MapReduce to
create and manage the underlying parallel executions, of GFS to store data associated
with the computation and of protocol buffers to provide a common data format for stored
records.
Like MapReduce, Sawzall assumes that parallel computations follow a given
pattern, which we have summarized in Figure 21.20. Sawzall assumes that the input to
a computation consists of raw data, which in turn consists of a set of records to be
processed. Computations then proceed by executing filters, which process each record
in parallel, producing emitted results. Aggregators take the emitted data and produce the
overall results of the computation.
Sawzall also makes two assumptions about the execution of filters and
aggregators:
(cid:129) The execution of filters and aggregators should be commutative across all records;
that is, filters can be executed in any order and the result will be the same.
(cid:129) The aggregator operations should be associative. That is the (implicit) parentheses
in execution do not matter, allowing more degrees of freedom in execution.
As might be expected from examining MapReduce, Sawzall programs that express the
filter operations and data emissions run in the map phase of MapReduce, with
aggregators corresponding to the reduce phase. A set of predefined aggregators are
provided by the language, including aggregators that carry out a summation of all the
emitted values (sum) or build a collection of all the emitted values (collection). Other
aggregators are more statistical, for example constructing a cumulative probability
distribution (quantile) or estimating the values that are most common (top). It is also


===== page 981 =====
SECTION 21.6 DISTRIBUTED COMPUTATION SERVICES 963
Figure 21.21 Summary of design choices related to distributed computation)
Element Design choice Rationale Trade-offs
MapReduce The use of a Hides details of parallelization and Design choices within
common distribution from the programmer; the framework may not
framework improvements to the infrastructure be appropriate for all
immediately exploited by all styles of distributed
MapReduce applications computation
Programming of Very simple programming model Again, may not be
system via two allowing rapid development of appropriate for all
operations,map complex distributed computations problem domains
andreduce
Inherent support Programmer does not need to worry Overhead associated
for fault-tolerant about dealing with faults with fault-recovery
distributed (particularly important for long- strategies
computations running tasks running over a physical
infrastructure where failures are
expected)
Sawzall Provision of a Again, support for rapid Assumes that programs
specialized development of often complex can be written in the
programming distributed computations with style supported (in
language for complexity hidden from the terms of filters and
distributed programmer (even more so than with aggregators)
computation MapReduce)
possible for a programmer to develop new aggregators, although this is expected to be
relatively rare.
We illustrate the use of Sawzall by a single, simple example from Pike et al.
[2005] illustrating the above features:
count: table sum of int;
total: table sum of float;
x: float = input;
emit count <- 1;
emit total <- x;
This program takes as input simple records of type float (a stream of values accessed
through the local variable x).The program also defines two aggregators introduced with
the keyword table, with the added keyword sum indicating that these are summation
aggregators (this keyword could equally have been one of collection,quantile or top, for
example). The calls of emit produce a stream of values that are processed by the
aggregators producing the desired results (in this case, a count of all the values in the
input stream together with a sum of all these values).
A full description of the Sawzall language and further examples can be found in
Pike et al.


===== page 982 =====
964 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
21.6.3 Summary of key design choices
The overall design choices relating to MapReduce and Sawzall are summarized in
Figure 21.21.
The overall benefits in both approaches stem from encouraging a particular style
of distributed computation and then providing common infrastructure to enable efficient
implementation of systems developed using this style. This approach has been
demonstrated to be effective right across Google applications and services, including
support of the core search functionality and in the demanding area of supporting cloud
applications such as Google Earth.
This work has sparked an interesting debate in the data management community
as to whether such abstractions are sufficient for all classes of application. For an insight
into this debate, refer to papers by Dean and Ghemawat [2010] and Stonebraker at al.
[2010] in Communications of the ACM.
21.7 Summary
This chapter concludes the book by addressing the key issue of how one very large
Internet enterprise has approached the design of a distributed system to support a
demanding set of real-world applications. This is a very challenging topic and one that
requires a thorough understanding of the technological choices available to distributed
systems developers at all levels of system development, including communication
paradigms, available services and associated distributed algorithms. The inevitable
trade-offs associated with the design choices demand a thorough understanding of the
application domain.
The approach taken in this chapter is to highlight the art of distributed systems
design through a substantial case study – that is, the examination of the design of the
underlying Google infrastructure, the platform and middleware used by Google to
support its search engine and expanding set of applications and services. This is a
compelling case study as it addresses what is the most complex and large-scale
distributed system ever constructed, and one that has demonstrably met its design
requirements.
This case study examined the overall architecture of the system together with in-
depth studies of the key underlying services – specifically, protocol buffers, the publish-
subscribe service, GFS, Chubby, Bigtable, MapReduce and Sawzall – which all work
together to support complex distributed applications and services including the core
search engine and Google Earth. One key lesson to be taken from this case study is the
importance of really understanding your application domain, deriving a core set of
underlying design principles and applying them consistently. In the case of Google, this
manifests itself in a strong advocacy of simplicity and low-overhead approaches
coupled with an emphasis on testing, logging and tracing. The end result is an
architecture that is highly scalable, reliable, high performance and open in terms of
supporting new applications and services.
The Google infrastructure is one of a number of middleware solutions for cloud
computing that have emerged in recent years (albeit only fully available within Google).


===== page 983 =====
SECTION 21.7 SUMMARY 965
Other solutions include the Amazon Web Services (AWS) [aws.amazon.com],
Microsoft’s Azure [www.microsoft.com IV] and open source solutions including
Hadoop (which includes an implementation of MapReduce) [hadoop.apache.org],
Eucalyptus [open.eucalyptus.com], the Google App Engine (available externally and
providing a window on some but not all of the functionality offered by the Google
infrastructure) [code.google.com IV] and Sector/Sphere [sector.sourceforge.net].
OpenStreetMap [www.openstreetmap.org], an open alternative to Google Maps that
operates in a similar manner using voluntarily developed software and non-commercial
servers, has also been developed. Details of these implementations are generally
available and the reader is encouraged to study a selection of these architectures,
comparing the design choices with those presented in the above case study.
Beyond that, there is a real paucity of published case studies related to distributed
systems design, and this is a pity given the potential educational value of studying
overall distributed systems architectures and their associated design principles. The
main contribution of this chapter is therefore to provide a first in-depth case study
illustrating the complexities of designing and implementing a complete distributed
system solution.


===== page 984 =====
966 CHAPTER 21 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: GOOGLE CASE STUDY
EXERCISES
21.1 To what extent is Google now a cloud provider company? Refer to the definition from
Chapter 1, repeated in Section 21.2 above. Chapter 1, page 921
21.2 The key requirements for the Google infrastructure are scalability, reliability,
performance and openness. Provide three example of where these requirements might
be in conflict and discuss how Google deals with these potential conflicts. page 924
21.3 A specification of a Person structure in XML was presented in Chapter 4 (Figure 4.12).
Rewrite this specification using protocol buffers. Chapter 4, page 929
21.4 Discuss the extent to which the RPC style supported by protocol buffers enhances
extensibility (especially the design decision to have one argument and one result).
page 931
21.5 Explain why the Google infrastructure supports three separate data storage facilities.
Why does Google not just adopt a commercial distributed database instead of utilizing
the three separate services? page 935
21.6 Both GFS and Bigtable make the same core design choice – to have a single master.
What are the repercussions of a failure of this single master in each case?
pages 937-938,950-952
21.7 In Section 21.5.2, we compared the cache consistency approach in Chubby with NFS,
concluding that NFS offers much weaker semantics in terms of seeing different versions
of files on different nodes. Perform a similar comparison between the cache consistency
approaches adopted in Chubby and AFS. Section 12.1.3, pages 943–944
21.8 As described in Section 21.5.2, the implementation of Paxos depends on the generation
of increasing and globally unique sequence numbers. This section also described a
possible implementation. Describe an alternative approach to implementing such
sequence numbers. pages 945–946
21.9 Figure 21.18 lists a number of possible applications of MapReduce. Describe one other
possible application and sketch out how this would be implemented in MapReduce,
providing in particular outline implementations of the map and reduce functions.
page 958
21.10 Provide an example of a distributed computation that would be difficult to implement in
MapReduce, giving full reasons for your answer. page 958


===== page 985 =====
REFERENCES
Online references
This reference list is available on the Web at www.cdk5.net/refs. It provides clickable
links for those documents that exist only on the Web. In this printed list items
identified by an underlined tag, for example, www.omg.org, point to an index page
leading to the document; direct links can be found in the online reference list.
The references to RFCs refer to the series of Internet standards and
specifications called ‘requests for comments’ that are available from the Internet
Engineering Task Force at www.ietf.org/rfc/ and several other well-known sites.
The online reference list may also be used as an aid to searching for web copies
of other documents by searching for authors or titles with Google or Citeseer at
citeseer.ist.psu.edu.
Online material written or edited by the authors to supplement the book is
referenced in the book by a www.cdk5.net tag but is not included in the reference list.
For example, www.cdk5.net/ipc refers to the additional material about interprocess
communication on our web pages.
.
Abadi and Gordon 1999 Abadi, M. and Gordon, A.D. (1999). A calculus for cryptographic
protocols: The spi calculus. Information and Computation, Vol. 148,
No. 1, pp. 1–70.
Abadi et al. 1998 Abadi, M., Birrell, A.D., Stata, R. and Wobber, E.P. (1998). Secure
Wweb tunneling. In Proceedings of the 7th International World Wide
Web Conference, pp. 531–9. Elsevier, in Computer Networks and ISDN
Systems, Volume 30, Nos 1–7.
Abrossimovet al. 1989 Abrossimov, V., Rozier, M. and Shapiro,M. (1989). Generic virtual
memory management for operating system kernels. Proceedings of 12th
ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles, December, pp.
123–36.
Accettaet al. 1986 Accetta, M., Baron, R., Golub, D., Rashid, R., Tevanian, A. and Young,
M.(1986). Mach: A new kernel foundation for UNIX development. In
Proceedings of the Summer 1986 USENIX Conference, pp. 93–112.
967


===== page 986 =====
968 REFERENCES
Adjie-Winoto et al. 1999 Adjie-Winoto, W., Schwartz, E., Balakrishnan, H. and Lilley, J. (1999).
The design and implementation of an intentional naming system. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Symposium on Operating System
Principles, published as Operating Systems Review, Vol. 34, No. 5, pp.
186–201.
Agrawalet al. 1987 Agrawal, D., Bernstein, A., Gupta, P. and Sengupta, S. (1987).
Distributed optimistic concurrency control with reduced rollback.
Distributed Computing, Vol. 2, No 1, pp. 45–59.
Ahamadet al. 1992 Ahamad, M., Bazzi, R., John, R., Kohli, P. and Neiger, G. (1992). The
Power of Processor Consistency. Technical report GIT-CC-92/34,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
Al-Muhtadi et al. 2002 Al-Muhtadi, J., Campbell, R., Kapadia, A., Mickunas, D. and Yi, S.
(2002). Routing through the mist: Privacy preserving communication in
ubiquitous computing environments. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(ICDCS’02), Vienna, Austria, July, pp. 74–83.
Albanna et al. 2001 Albanna, Z., Almeroth, K., Meyer, D. and Schipper, M. (2001). IANA
Guidelines for IPv4 Multicast Address Assignments. Internet RFC 3171.
Alonso et al. 2004 Alonso, G., Casata, C., Kuno, H. and Machiraju, V. (2004). Web
Services, Concepts, Architectures and Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag.
Anderson 1993 Anderson, D.P. (1993). Metascheduling for continuous media. ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 11, No. 3, pp. 226–52.
Anderson 1996 Anderson, R. J. (1996). The Eternity Service. In Proceedings of
Pragocrypt ’96, pp. 242–52.
Anderson 2008 Anderson, R.J. (2008). Security Engineering, 2nd edn. John Wiley &
Sons.
Anderson et al. 1990 Anderson, D.P., Herrtwich, R.G. and Schaefer, C. (1990). SRP – A
Resource Reservation Protocol for Guaranteed-Performance
Communication in the Internet. Technical report 90-006, International
Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA.
Anderson et al. 1991 Anderson, T., Bershad, B., Lazowska, E. and Levy, H. (1991).
Scheduler activations: Efficient kernel support for the user-level
management of parallelism. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
Symposium on Operating System Principles, pp. 95–109.
Anderson et al. 1995 Anderson, T., Culler, D., Patterson, D. and the NOW team. (1995). A
case for NOW (Networks Of Workstations). IEEE Micro, Vol. 15, No.
1, pp. 54–64.
Anderson et al. 1996 Anderson, T.E., Dahlin, M.D., Neefe, J.M., Patterson, D.A., Roselli,
D.S. and Wang, R.Y. (1996). Serverless Network File Systems. ACM
Trans. on Computer Systems, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 41–79.


===== page 987 =====
REFERENCES 969
Anderson et al. 2002 Anderson, D.P., Cobb, J., Korpela, E., Lebofsky, M. and Werthimer, D.
(2002). SETI@home: An experiment in public-resource computing.
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 45, No. 11, pp. 56–61.
Anderson et al. 2004 Anderson, R., Chan, H. and Perrig, A. (2004). Key infection: Smart trust
for smart dust. In Proceedings of the IEEE 12th International
Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP 2004), Berlin, Germany,
October, pp. 206–215.
ANSA 1989 ANSA (1989). The Advanced Network Systems Architecture (ANSA)
Reference Manual. Castle Hill, Cambridge, England: Architecture
Project Management.
ANSI 1985 American National Standards Institute (1985). American National
Standard for Financial Institution Key Management. Standard X9.17
(revised).
Armand et al. 1989 Armand, F., Gien, M., Herrman, F. and Rozier, M. (1989). Distributing
UNIX brings it back to its original virtues. In Proc. Workshop on
Experiences with Building Distributed and Multiprocessor Systems,
October, pp. 153–174.
Arnold et al. 1999 Arnold, K., O’Sullivan, B., Scheifler, R.W., Waldo, J. and Wollrath,
A. (1999). The Jini Specification. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
associates.amazon.com Amazon Web Service FAQs.
Attiya and Welch 1998 Attiya, H. and Welch, J. (1998). Distributed Computing –
Fundamentals, Simulations and Advanced Topics. Maidenhead,
England: McGraw-Hill.
aws.amazon.com Amazon Web Services. Home page.
Babaoglu et al. 1998 Babaoglu, O., Davoli, R., Montresor, A. and Segala, R. (1998). System
support for partition-aware network applications. In Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(ICDCS’98), pp. 184–191.
Bacon 2002 Bacon, J. (2002). Concurrent Systems, 3rd edn. Harlow, England:
Addison-Wesley.
Baker 1997 Baker, S. (1997). CORBA Distributed Objects Using Orbix. Harlow,
England: Addison-Wesley.
Bakken and Schlichting Bakken, D.E. and Schlichting, R.D. (1995). Supporting fault-tolerant
1995 parallel programming in Linda. IEEE Transactions Parallel and
Distributed Systems, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 287–302.
Balakrishnan et al. 1995 Balakrishnan, H., Seshan, S. and Katz, R.H. (1995). Improving reliable
transport and hand-off performance in cellular wireless networks. In
Proceedings of the ACM Mobile Computing and Networking
Conference, pp. 2–11.


===== page 988 =====
970 REFERENCES
Balakrishnan et al. 1996 Balakrishnan, H., Padmanabhan, V., Seshan, S. and Katz, R. (1996). A
comparison of mechanisms for improving TCP performance over
wireless links. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM ’96 Conference,
pp. 256–69.
Balanet al. 2003 Balan, R.K., Satyanarayanan, M., Park, S., Okoshi, T. (2003).
Tactics-based remote execution for mobile computing. In Proceedings
of the First USENIXInternational Conference on Mobile Systems,
Applications, and Services (MobiSys 2003), San Francisco, CA, May,
pp. 273–286.
Balazinska et al. 2002 Balazinska, M., Balakrishnan, H. and Karger, D. (2002). INS/Twine: A
scalable peer-to-peer architecture for intentional resource discovery. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Pervasive Computing,
Zurich, Switzerland, August, pp. 195–210.
Baldoni et al. 2005 Baldoni, R. Beraldi, R., Cugola, G., Migliavacca, M. and Querzoni, L.
(2005). Structure-less content-based routing in mobile ad hoc networks.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Pervasive Services,
pp. 37–46.
Baldoni and Virgillito 2005 Baldoni, R. and Virgillito, A. (2005). Distributed event routing in
publish/subscribe communication systems: A survey. Technical Report
15-05, Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica, Universita di Roma
“La Sapienza”.
Baldoni et al. 2007 Baldoni, R., Beraldi, R., Quema, V., Querzoni, L. and
Tucci-Piergiovanni, S. (2007). TERA: Topic-based event routing for
peer-to-peer architectures. In Proceedings of the 2007 Inaugural
International Conference on Distributed Event-Based Systems. Toronto,
Ontario, Canada, June, pp. 2–13.
Balfanzet al. 2002 Balfanz, D., Smetters, D.K., Stewart, P. and Wong, H.C. (2002).
Talking to strangers: Authentication in ad-hoc wireless networks. In
Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium, San Diego, CA, February.
Banerjea and Mah 1991 Banerjea, A. and Mah, B.A. (1991). The real-time channel
administration protocol. Second International Workshop on Network
and Operating System Support for Digital Audio and Video, Heidelberg,
Germany.
Baran 1964 Baran, P. (1964). On Distributed Communications. Research
Memorandum RM-3420-PR, Rand Corporation.
Barborak et al. 1993 Barborak, M., Malek, M. and Dahbura, A. (1993). The consensus
problem in fault-tolerant computing. ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 25,
No. 2, pp. 171–220.


===== page 989 =====
REFERENCES 971
Barghouti and Kaiser 1991 Barghouti, N.S. and Kaiser, G.E. (1991). Concurrency control in
advanced database applications. ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 23, No.
3, pp. 269–318.
Barhamet al. 2003a Barham, P., Dragovic, B., Fraser, K., Hand, S., Harris, T., Ho, A.,
Neugebauer, R., Pratt, I. and Warfield, A. (2003). Xen and the art of
virtualization. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles, Bolton Landing, NY, October, pp.
164–177.
Barhamet al. 2003b Barham, P., Dragovic, B., Fraser, K., Hand, S., Harris, T., Ho,
A.,Kotsovinos, E., Madhavapeddy, A.V.S., Neugebauer, R., Pratt, I. and
Warfield, A. (2003). Xen 2002. Technical Report UCAM-CL-TR-553,
Computing Laboratory, University of Cambridge.
Barr and Asanovic 2003 Barr, K. and Asanovic, K. (2003). Energy aware lossless data
compression.Proceedings of the First USENIXInternational
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys
2003), San Francisco, CA, May, pp. 231–244.
Barton et al. 2002 Barton, J., Kindberg, T. and Sadalgi, S. (2002). Physical registration:
Configuring electronic directories using handheld devices. IEEE
Wireless Communications, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 30–38.
Baset and Schulzrinne 2006 Baset, S.A. and Schulzrinne, H.G. (2006). An analysis of the Skype
peer-to-peer Internet telephony protocol. In Proceedings of the 25th
IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM’06), pp. 1–11.
Bateset al. 1996 Bates, J., Bacon, J., Moody, K. and Spiteri, M. (1996). Using events for
the scalable federation of heterogeneous components. European
SIGOPS Workshop.
Baudeet al. 2009 Baude, F., Caromel, D., Dalmasso, C., Danelutto, M., Getov, V.,
Henrio, L. and Pérez, C. (2009). GCM: A grid extension for Fractal
autonomous distributed components. Annals of Telecommunications,
Springer, Vol. 64, No. 1, pp. 5–24.
Bell and LaPadula 1975 Bell, D.E. and LaPadula, L.J. (1975). Computer Security Model: Unified
Exposition and Multics Interpretation. Mitre Corporation.
Bellman 1957 Bellman, R.E. (1957). Dynamic Programming. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Bellovin and Merritt 1990 Bellovin, S.M. and Merritt, M. (1990). Limitations of the Kerberos
authentication system. ACM Computer Communications Review, Vol.
20, No. 5, pp. 119–32.
Bellwood et al. 2003 Bellwood, T., Clément, L. and von Riegen, C. (eds.) (2003). UDDI
Version 3.0.1. Oasis Corporation.
Beresford and Stajano 2003 Beresford, A. and Stajano, F. (2003). Location privacy in pervasive
computing. IEEE Pervasive Computing, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 46–55.


===== page 990 =====
972 REFERENCES
Berners-Lee 1991 Berners-Lee, T. (1991). World Wide Web Seminar.
Berners-Lee 1999 Berners-Lee, T. (1999). Weaving the Web. New York: HarperCollins.
Berners-Leeet al. 2005 Berners Lee, T., Fielding, R. and Masinter, L. (2005). Uniform
Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic syntax. Internet RFC 3986.
Bernstein et al. 1980 Bernstein, P.A., Shipman, D.W. and Rothnie, J.B. (1980). Concurrency
control in a system for distributed databases (SDD-1). ACM
Transactions on Database Systems, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 18–51.
Bernstein et al. 1987 Bernstein, P., Hadzilacos, V. and Goodman, N. (1987). Concurrency
Control and Recovery in Database Systems. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley. Text available online.
Bershadet al. 1990 Bershad, B., Anderson, T., Lazowska, E. and Levy, H. (1990).
Lightweight remote procedure call. ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 37–55.
Bershadet al. 1991 Bershad, B., Anderson, T., Lazowska, E. and Levy, H. (1991).
User-level interprocess communication for shared memory
multiprocessors. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 9, No.
2, pp. 175–198.
Bershadet al. 1995 Bershad, B., Savage, S., Pardyak, P., Sirer, E., Fiuczynski, M., Becker,
D., Chambers, C. and Eggers, S. (1995). Safety and performance in the
SPIN operating system. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles, pp. 267–84.
Bessani et al. 2008 Bessani, A. N., Alchieri, E. P., Correia, M. and Fraga, J. S. (2008).
DepSpace: A Byzantine fault-tolerant coordination service. In
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Sigops/Eurosys European Conference on
Computer Systems. Glasgow, Scotland, April, pp.163-176.
Bhagwan et al. 2003 Bhagwan, R., Savage, S. and Voelker, G. (2003). Understanding
availability. In Proc.2nd International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer
Systems (IPTPS ’03), Berkeley, CA, February.
Bhatti and Friedrich 1999 Bhatti, N. and Friedrich, R. (1999). Web Server Support for Tiered
Services. Hewlett-Packard Corporation Technical Report
HPL-1999-160.
Birman 1993 Birman, K.P. (1993). The process group approach to reliable distributed
computing. Comms. ACM, Vol. 36, No. 12, pp. 36–53.
Birman 2004 Birman, K.P. (2004). Like it or not, web services are distributed
Objects!Comms. ACM. Vol. 47, No. 12, pp. 60–62. .
Birman 2005 Birman, K.P. (2005). Reliable Distributed Systems: Technologies,Web
Services and Applications. Springer-Verlag.
Birman and Joseph 1987a Birman, K.P. and Joseph, T.A. (1987). Reliable communication in the
presence of failures. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 5,
No. 1, pp. 47–76.


===== page 991 =====
REFERENCES 973
Birman and Joseph 1987b Birman, K. and Joseph, T. (1987). Exploiting virtual synchrony in
distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles, pp. 123–38.
Birmanet al. 1991 Birman, K.P., Schiper, A. and Stephenson, P. (1991). Lightweight
causal and atomic group multicast. ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 272–314.
Birrell and Needham 1980 Birrell, A.D. and Needham, R.M. (1980). A universal file server. IEEE
Transactions Software Engineering, Vol. SE-6, No. 5, pp. 450–3.
Birrell and Nelson 1984 Birrell, A.D. and Nelson, B.J. (1984). Implementing remote procedure
calls.ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp.
39–59.
Birrellet al. 1982 Birrell, A.D., Levin, R., Needham, R.M. and Schroeder, M.D. (1982).
Grapevine:An exercise in distributed computing. Comms. ACM, Vol.
25, No. 4, pp. 260–73.
Birrellet al. 1995 Birrell, A., Nelson, G. and Owicki, S. (1993). Network objects. In
Proceedings of the 14th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, pp. 217–30.
Bisiani and Forin 1988 Bisiani, R. and Forin, A. (1988). Multilanguage parallel programming
of heterogeneous machines. IEEE Transactions Computers, Vol. 37,
No. 8, pp. 930–45.
Black 1990 Black, D. (1990). Scheduling support for concurrency and parallelism
in the Mach operating system. IEEE Computer, Vol. 23, No. 5, pp.
35–43.
Blakley 1999 Blakley, R. (1999). CORBA Security – An Introduction to Safe
Computing with Objects. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Bloch 2006 Bloch, J. (2006). How to design a good API and why it matters. In
Companion to the 21st ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Object-Oriented
Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications. (OOPSLA’06),
Portland, Oregon, pp. 506–507.
Bolosky et al. 1996 Bolosky, W., Barrera, J., Draves, R., Fitzgerald, R., Gibson, G., Jones,
M., Levi, S., Myhrvold, N. and Rashid, R. (1996). The Tiger video
fileserver. 6th NOSSDAV Conference, Zushi, Japan, April.
Bolosky et al. 1997 Bolosky, W., Fitzgerald, R. and Douceur, J. (1997). Distributed
schedule management in the Tiger video fileserver. In Proc. of the16th
ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles, St Malo, France,
October, pp. 212–23.
Bolosky et al. 2000 Bolosky, W.J., Douceur, J.R., Ely, D. and Theimer, M. (2000).
Feasibility of a serverless distributed file system deployed on an existing
set of desktop PCs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, pp. 34–43.


===== page 992 =====
974 REFERENCES
Bonnaire et al. 1995 Bonnaire, X., Baggio, A. and Prun, D. (1995). Intrusion free monitoring:
An observation engine for message server based applications. In
Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Computer and
Information Sciences (ISCIS X), pp. 541–48.
Booch et al. 2005 Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J. and Jacobson, I. (2005). The Unified Modeling
Language User Guide, 2nd edn. Reading MA: Addison-Wesley.
Borisovet al. 2001 Borisov, N., Goldberg, I. and Wagner, D. (2001). Intercepting mobile
communications: The insecurity of 802.11. In Proceedings of
MOBICOM 2001, pp. 180–9.
Bowmanet al. 1990 Bowman, M., Peterson, L. and Yeatts, A. (1990). Univers: An
attribute-based name server. Software–Practice and Experience, Vol.
20, No. 4, pp. 403–24.
Box 1998 Box, D. (1998). Essential COM. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Box and Curbera 2004 Box, D. and Curbera, F. (2004). Web Services Addressing
(WS-Addressing). BEA Systems, IBM and Microsoft, August.
boxee.tv Boxee. Home page.
Boykin et al. 1993 Boykin, J., Kirschen, D., Langerman, A. and LoVerso, S. (1993).
Programming under Mach. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Bray and Sturman 2002 Bray, J. and Sturman. C.F. (2002). Bluetooth: Connect Without Cables,
2nd edn. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Brin and Page 1998 Brin, S. and Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual
Web search engine. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, Vol. 30,
Issue 1-7, pp. 107-117.
Bruneton et al. 2006 Bruneton, E., Coupaye, T., LeClercq, M., Quema, V. and Stefani, J.B.
(2006). The Fractal component model and its support in Java. Software
– Practice and Experience, Vol. 36, Nos.11–21, pp. 1257–1284.
Buford 1994 Buford, J.K. (1994). Multimedia Systems. Addison-Wesley.
Burns and Wellings 1998 Burns, A. and Wellings, A. (1998). Concurrency in Ada. England:
Cambridge University Press.
Burrows et al. 1989 Burrows, M., Abadi, M. and Needham, R. (1989). A logic of
authentication. Technical Report 39. Palo Alto, CA: Digital Equipment
Corporation Systems Research Center.
Burrows et al. 1990 Burrows, M., Abadi, M. and Needham, R. (1990). A logic of
authentication. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 8, No. 1,
pp. 18–36.
Burrows 2006 Burrows, M. (2006). The Chubby lock service for loosely-coupled
distributed systems. In Proc. of the 7th Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation, Seattle, WA, pp. 335–350.
Bush 1945 Bush, V. (1945). As we may think. The Atlantic Monthly, July.


===== page 993 =====
REFERENCES 975
Bushmann et al. 2007 Bushmann, F., Henney, K. and Schmidt, D.C. (2007). Pattern-Oriented
Software Architecture: A Pattern for Distributed Computing, New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Busiet al. 2003 Busi, N., Manfredini, C., Montresor, A. and Zavattaro, G. (2003).
PeerSpaces: Data-driven coordination in peer-to-peer networks. In
Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing,
Melbourne, Florida, March, pp. 380–386.
Callaghan 1996a Callaghan, B. (1996). WebNFS Client Specification. Internet RFC 2054.
Callaghan 1996b Callaghan, B. (1996). WebNFS Server Specification. Internet RFC
2055.
Callaghan 1999 Callaghan, B. (1999). NFS Illustrated. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Callaghan et al. 1995 Callaghan, B., Pawlowski, B. and Staubach, P. (1995). NFS Version 3
Protocol Specification. Internet RFC 1813, Sun Microsystems.
Campbell 1997 Campbell, R. (1997). Managing AFS: The Andrew File System. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Campbell et al. 1993 Campbell, R., Islam, N., Raila, D. and Madany, P. (1993). Designing
and implementing Choices: An object-oriented system in C++. Comms.
ACM, Vol. 36, No. 9, pp. 117–26.
Canetti and Rabin 1993 Canetti, R. and Rabin, T. (1993). Fast asynchronous Byzantine
agreement with optimal resilience. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 42–51.
Cao and Singh 2005 Cao, F. and Singh, J. P. (2005). MEDYM: match-early with dynamic
multicast for content-based publish-subscribe networks. In Proceedings
of the ACM/IFIP/USENIX 2005 International Conference on
Middleware, Grenoble, France, November, pp. 292–313.
Carrieroet al. 1995 Carriero, N., Gelernter, D. and Zuck, L. (1995). Bauhaus Linda. In
LNCS 924: Object-based models and languages for concurrent systems.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. pp. 66–76.
Carteret al. 1991 Carter, J.B., Bennett, J.K. and Zwaenepoel, W. (1991). Implementation
and performance of Munin. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Symposium
on Operating System Principles, pp. 152–64.
Carteret al. 1998 Carter, J., Ranganathan, A. and Susarla, S. (1998). Khazana, an
infrastructure for building distributed services. In Proceedings of
ICDCS ’98. Amsterdam, The Netherland, pp. 562–71.
Carzanigaet al. 2001 Carzaniga, A., Rosenblum, D. S. and Wolf, A. L. (2001). Design and
evaluation of a wide-area event notification service. ACM Trans. on
Compuer Systems, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 332–383.


===== page 994 =====
976 REFERENCES
Castro and Liskov 2000 Castro, M. and Liskov, B. (2000). Proactive recovery in a
Byzantine-fault-tolerant system. Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’00), San
Diego, CA, October, p. 19.
Castroet al. 2002a Castro, M., Druschel, P., Hu, Y.C. and Rowstron, A. (2002).
Topology-aware routing in structured peer-to-peer overlay networks.
Technical Report MSR-TR-2002-82, Microsoft Research, 2002.
Castroet al. 2002b Castro, M., Druschel, P., Kermarrec, and Rowstron, A. (2002).
SCRIBE: A large-scale and decentralised application-level multicast
infrastructure. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication
(JSAC), Vol. 20, No, 8, pp. 1489–99.
Castroet al. 2003 Castro, M., Costa, M. and Rowstron, A. (2003). Performance and
dependability of structured peer-to-peer overlays. Technical Report
MSR-TR-2003-94, Microsoft Research, 2003.
CCITT 1988a CCITT (1988). Recommendation X.500:The Directory – Overview of
Concepts, Models and Service. International Telecommunications
Union, Place des Nations, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
CCITT 1988b CCITT (1988). Recommendation X.509: The Directory –
Authentication Framework. International Telecommunications Union,
Place des Nations, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
CCITT 1990 CCITT (1990). Recommendation I.150:B-ISDN ATM Functional
Characteristics. International Telecommunications Union, Place des
Nations, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
Ceri and Owicki 1982 Ceri, S. and Owicki, S. (1982). On the use of optimistic methods for
concurrency control in distributed databases. In Proceedings of the 6th
Berkeley Workshop on Distributed Data Management and Computer
Networks, Berkeley, CA, pp. 117–30.
Ceri and Pelagatti 1985 Ceri, S. and Pelagatti, G. (1985). Distributed Databases – Principles
and Systems. Maidenhead, England: McGraw-Hill.
Chalmerset al. 2004 Chalmers, D., Dulay, N. and Sloman, M. (2004). Meta data to support
context aware mobile applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE Intl.
Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM 2004), Berkeley, CA,
January, pp. 199–210.
Chandra and Toueg 1996 Chandra, T. and Toueg, S. (1996). Unreliable failure detectors for
reliable distributed systems. Journal of the ACM. Vol 43, No. 2, pp.
225–67.
Chandraet al. 2007 Chandra, T. D., Griesemer, R. and Redstone, J. (2007). Paxos made live:
An engineering perspective. In Proc. of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM
Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, (PODC’07),
Portland, Oregon, pp. 398–407.


===== page 995 =====
REFERENCES 977
Chandy and Lamport 1985 Chandy, K. and Lamport, L. (1985). Distributed snapshots: Determining
global states of distributed systems. ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 63–75.
Chang and Maxemchuk Chang, J. and Maxemchuk, N. (1984). Reliable broadcast protocols.
1984 ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 251–75.
Chang and Roberts 1979 Chang, E.G. and Roberts, R. (1979). An improved algorithm for
decentralized extrema-finding in circular configurations of processors.
Comms. ACM, Vol. 22, No. 5, pp. 281–3.
Changet al. 2008 Chang, F., Dean, J., Ghemawat, S., Hsieh, W., Wallach, D., Burrows,
M., Chandra, T., Fikes, A. and Gruber, R. (2008). Bigtable: A
distributed storage system for structured data. ACM Trans. on Computer
Systems Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 1–26.
Charron-Bost 1991 Charron-Bost, B. (1991). Concerning the size of logical clocks in
distributed systems. Information Processing Letters, Vol. 39, No.1, pp.
11–16.
Chaum 1981 Chaum, D. (1981). Untraceable electronic mail, return addresses and
digital pseudonyms. Comms. ACM, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 84–88.
Chenet al. 1994 Chen, P., Lee, E., Gibson, G., Katz, R. and Patterson, D. (1994). RAID:
High-performance, reliable secondary storage. ACM Computing
Surveys, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 145–188.
Cheng 1998 Cheng, C.K. (1998). A survey of media servers. Hong Kong University
CSIS, November.
Chenget al. 2005 Cheng, Y-C., Chawathe, Y., LaMarca, A. and Krumm J. (2005)
Accuracy characterization for metropolitan-scale Wi-Fi localization,
Third International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services (MobiSys 2005), June.
Cheriton 1984 Cheriton, D.R. (1984). The V kernel: A software base for distributed
systems.IEEE Software, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 19–42.
Cheriton 1986 Cheriton, D.R. (1986). VMTP: A protocol for the next generation of
communication systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCOMM ’86
Symposium on Communication Architectures and Protocols, pp.
406–15.
Cheriton and Mann 1989 Cheriton, D. and Mann, T. (1989). Decentralizing a global naming
service for improved performance and fault tolerance. ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 147–83.
Cheriton and Skeen 1993 Cheriton, D. and Skeen, D. (1993). Understanding the limitations of
causally and totally ordered communication. In Proceedings of the 14th
ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles, Dec., pp. 44–57.
Cheriton and Zwaenepoel Cheriton, D.R. and Zwaenepoel, W. (1985). Distributed process groups
1985 in the V kernel. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 3, No. 2,
pp. 77–107.


===== page 996 =====
978 REFERENCES
Cheswick and Bellovin Cheswick, E.R. and Bellovin, S.M. (1994). Firewalls and Internet
1994 Security. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Chien 2004 Chien, A. (2004). Massively distributed computing: Virtual screening
on a desktop Grid. In Foster, I. and Kesselman, C. (eds.), The Grid 2.
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kauffman.
Chisnall 2007 Chisnall, D. (2007). The Definitive Guide to the Xen Hypervisor. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Choudhary et al. 1989 Choudhary, A., Kohler, W., Stankovic, J. and Towsley, D. (1989). A
modified priority based probe algorithm for distributed deadlock
detection and resolution. IEEE Transactions Software Engineering,
Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 10–17.
Chuet al. 2000 Chu,Y.-H., Rao, S.G. and Zhang, H. (2000). A case for end system
multicast. In Proc. of ACM Sigmetrics, June, pp. 1–12.
Ciliaet al. 2004 Cilia, M., Antollini, M., Bornhövd, C. and Buchmann, A. (2004).
Dealing with heterogeneous data in pub/sub systems: The
concept-based approach. In Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Distributed Event-Based Systems, Edinburgh, Scotland, May, pp.
26–31.
Clark 1982 Clark, D.D. (1982). Window and Acknowledgement Strategy in TCP.
Internet RFC 813.
Clark 1988 Clark, D.D. (1988). The design philosophy of the DARPA Internet
protocols. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, Vol.
18, No. 4, pp. 106–114.
Clarkeet al. 2000 Clarke, I., Sandberg, O., Wiley, B. and Hong, T. (2000). Freenet: A
distributed anonymous information storage and retrieval system. In
Proc. of the ICSI Workshop on Design Issues in Anonymity and
Unobservability, Berkeley, CA, pp. 46–66.
code.google.com I Protocol buffers. Home page.
code.google.com II Protocol buffers. Developer guide: techniques.
code.google.com III Protocol buffers. Third-party add-ons (RPC implementations).
code.google.com IV Google App Engine. Home page.
Cohen 2003 Cohen, B. (2003). Incentives build robustness in BitTorrent. May 2003,
Internet publication.
Comer 2006 Comer, D.E. (2006). Internetworking with TCP/IP, Volume 1:
Principles, Protocols and Architecture, 5th edn. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Comer 2007 Comer, D.E. (2007). The Internet Book, 4th edn. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.


===== page 997 =====
REFERENCES 979
Condict et al. 1994 Condict, M., Bolinger, D., McManus, E., Mitchell, D. and Lewontin, S.
(1994). Microkernel modularity with integrated kernel performance.
Technical report, OSF Research Institute, Cambridge, MA, April.
Coulouris et al. 1998 Coulouris, G.F., Dollimore, J. and Roberts, M. (1998). Role and
task-based access control in the PerDiS groupware platform. Third ACM
Workshop on Role-Based Access Control, George Mason University,
Washington, DC, October 22–23.
Coulson et al. 2008 Coulson, G., Blair, G., Grace, P., Taiani, F., Joolia, A., Lee, K., Ueyama,
J. and Sivaharan, T. (2008). A generic component model for building
systems software. ACM Trans. on Computer Systems, Vol. 26, No. 1,
pp. 1–42.
Cristian 1989 Cristian, F. (1989). Probabilistic clock synchronization. Distributed
Computing, Vol. 3, pp. 146–58.
Cristian 1991 Cristian, F. (1991). Reaching agreement on processor group
membership in synchronous distributed systems. Distributed
Computing, Vol. 4, pp. 175–87.
Cristian and Fetzer 1994 Cristian, F. and Fetzer, C. (1994). Probabilistic internal clock
synchronization. In Proceedings of the 13th Symposium on Reliable
Distributed Systems, October, pp. 22–31.
Crowet al. 1997 Crow, B., Widjaja, I., Kim, J. and Sakai, P. (1997). IEEE 802.11
wireless local area networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 35,
No. 9, pp. 116–26.
cryptography.org North American Cryptography Archives.
Culleret al. 2001 Culler, D.E., Hill, J., Buonadonna, P., Szewczyk, R. and Woo, A.
(2001). A network-centric approach to embedded software for tiny
devices. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Embedded
Software, Tahoe City, CA, October, pp. 114–130.
Culleret al. 2004 Culler, D., Estrin, D. and Srivastava, M. (2004). Overview of sensor
networks. IEEE Computer, Vol. 37, No. 8, pp. 41–49.
Curtin and Dolske 1998 Kurtin, M. and Dolski, J. (1998). A brute force search of DES Keyspace.
;login: – the Newsletter of the USENIX Association, May.
Custer 1998 Custer, H. (1998). Inside Windows NT, 2nd edn.. Redmond, WA:
Microsoft Press.
Czerwinski et al. 1999 Czerwinski, S., Zhao, B., Hodes, T., Joseph, A. and Katz, R. (1999). An
architecture for a secure discovery service. In Proceedings of the Fifth
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networks.
Seattle, WA, pp.24–53.
Dabek et al. 2001 Dabek, F., Kaashoek, M.F., Karger, D., Morris, R. and Stoica, I. (2001).
Wide-area cooperative storage with CFS. In Proc. of the ACM
Symposium on Operating System Principles, October, pp. 202–15.


===== page 998 =====
980 REFERENCES
Dabek et al. 2003 Dabek, F., Zhao, B., Druschel, P., Kubiatowicz, J. and Stoica, I.(2003).
Ion Stoica, Towards a common API for structured peer-to-peer overlays.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer
Systems(IPTPS ’03), Berkeley, CA, February, pp. 33–44.
Daemen and Rijmen 2000 Daemen, J. and Rijmen, V. (2000). The block cipher Rijndael.
Quisquater, J.-J. and Schneier, B.(eds.). Smart Card Research and
Applications, LNCS 1820. Springer-Verlag, pp. 288–296.
Daemen and Rijmen 2002 Daemen, J. and Rijmen, V. (2002). The Design of Rijndael: AES – The
Advanced Encryption Standard, New York: Springer-Verlag.
Dasgupta et al. 1991 Dasgupta, P., LeBlanc Jr., R.J., Ahamad, M. and Ramachandran, U.
(1991). The Clouds distributed operating system. IEEE Computer, Vol.
24, No. 11, pp. 34–44.
Davidson 1984 Davidson, S.B. (1984). Optimism and consistency in partitioned
database systems. ACM Transactions on Database Systems, Vol. 9, No.
3, pp. 456–81.
Davidson et al. 1985 Davidson, S.B., Garcia-Molina, H. and Skeen, D. (1985). Consistency
in partitioned networks. Computing Surveys, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 341–70.
Davies et al. 1998 Davies, N., Friday, A., Wade, S. and Blair, G. (1998). L2imbo: a
distributed systems platform for mobile computing. Mobile Networks
and Applications, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 143–156.
de Ipiña et al. 2002 de Ipiña, D.L., Mendonça, P. and Hopper, A. (2002). TRIP: A low-cost
vision-based location system for ubiquitous computing. Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 206–219.
Dean 2006 Dean, J. (2006) Experiences with MapReduce, an abstraction for
large-scale computation. In Proc. of the 15th International Conference
on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques, (PACT’06),
Seattle, WA, p. 1.
Dean and Ghemawat 2004 Dean, J. and Ghemawat, S. (2004). MapReduce: simplified data
processing on large clusters. In Proc. of Operating System Design and
Implementation, (OSDI’04), San Francisco, CA, pp. 137–150.
Dean and Ghemawat 2008 Dean, J. and Ghemawat, S. (2008). MapReduce: Simplified data
processing on large clusters. Comms. ACM, Vol. 51, No. 1, pp. 107–113.
Dean and Ghemawat 2010 Dean, J. and Ghemawat, S. (2010). MapReduce: a flexible data
processing tool. Comms. ACM, Vol. 53, No. 1, pp. 72–77.
Debaty and Caswell 2001 Debaty, P. and Caswell, D. (2001). Uniform web presence architecture
for people, places, and things. IEEE Personal Communications, Vol. 8,
No. 4, pp. 6–11.
DEC 1990 Digital Equipment Corporation (1990). In Memoriam: J. C. R. Licklider
1915–1990. Technical Report 61, DEC Systems Research Center.


===== page 999 =====
REFERENCES 981
DeCandia et al. 2007 DeCandia, G., Hastorun, D., Jampani, M., Kakulapati, G., Lakshman,
A., Pilchin, A., Sivasubramanian, S., Vosshall, P. and Vogels, W.
(2007). Dynamo: Amazon's highly available key-value store. SIGOPS
Oper. Syst. Rev. Vol. 41, No. 6, pp. 205–220.
Delgrossiet al. 1993 Delgrossi, L., Halstrick, C., Hehmann, D., Herrtwich, R.G., Krone, O.,
Sandvoss, J. and Vogt, C. (1993). Media scaling for audiovisual
communication with the Heidelberg transport system. ACM Multimedia
’93, Anaheim, CA.
Demerset al. 1989 Demers, A., Keshav, S. and Shenker, S. (1989). Analysis and simulation
of a fair queueing algorithm. ACM SIGCOMM ’89.
Denning and Denning 1977 Denning, D. and Denning, P. (1977). Certification of programs for
secure information flow. Comms. ACM, Vol. 20, No. 7, pp. 504–13.
Dertouzos 1974 Dertouzos, M.L. (1974). Control robotics – the procedural control of
physical processes. IFIP Congress.
Dierks and Allen 1999 Dierks, T. and Allen, C. (1999). The TLS Protocol Version 1.0. Internet
RFC 2246.
Diffie 1988 Diffie, W. (1988). The first ten years of public-key cryptography.
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 76, No. 5, pp. 560–77.
Diffie and Hellman 1976 Diffie, W. and Hellman, M.E. (1976). New directions in cryptography.
IEEE Transactions Information Theory, Vol. IT-22, pp. 644–54.
Diffie and Landau 1998 Diffie, W. and Landau, S. (1998). Privacy on the Line. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Dijkstra 1959 Dijkstra, E.W. (1959). A note on two problems in connection with
graphs.Numerische Mathematic, Vol. 1, pp. 269–71.
Dilleyet al. 2002 Dilley, J., Maggs, B., Parikh, J., Prokop, H., Sitaraman, R. and Weihl,
B. (2002). Globally distributed content delivery. IEEE Internet
Computing, pp. 50–58.
Dingledine et al. 2000 Dingledine, R., Freedman, M.J. and Molnar, D. (2000). The Free Haven
project: Distributed anonymous storage service. In Proc. Workshop on
Design Issues in Anonymity and Unobservability, Berkeley, CA, July,
pp. 67–95.
Dolev and Malki 1996 Dolev, D. and Malki, D. (1996). The Transis approach to high
availability cluster communication. Comms. ACM, Vol. 39, No. 4, pp.
64–70.
Dolev and Strong 1983 Dolev, D. and Strong, H. (1983). Authenticated algorithms for
Byzantine agreement. SIAM Journal of Computing, Vol. 12, No. 4,
pp.656–66.
Dolev et al. 1986 Dolev, D., Halpern, J., and Strong, H. (1986). On the possibility and
impossibility of achieving clock synchronization. Journal of Computing
Systems Science, Vol. 32, No. 2 , pp. 230–50.


===== page 1000 =====
982 REFERENCES
Dorcey 1995 Dorcey, T. (1995). CU-SeeMe desktop video conferencing software.
Connexions, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 42–45.
Douceur and Bolosky 1999 Douceur, J.R. and Bolosky, W. (1999). Improving responsiveness of a
stripe-scheduled media server. In Proc. IS &T/SPIE Conf. on
Multimedia Computing and Networking, pp. 192–203.
Douglis and Ousterhout Douglis, F. and Ousterhout, J. (1991). Transparent process migration:
1991 Design alternatives and the Sprite implementation, Software – Practice
and Experience, Vol. 21, No. 8, pp. 757–89.
Draves 1990 Draves, R. (1990). A revised IPC interface. In Proceedings of the
USENIX Mach Workshop, pp. 101–21, October.
Draves et al. 1989 Draves, R.P., Jones, M.B. and Thompson, M.R. (1989). MIG - the Mach
Interface Generator. Technical Report,Dept. of Computer Science,
Carnegie-Mellon University.
Druschel and Peterson 1993 Druschel, P. and Peterson, L. (1993). Fbufs: a high-bandwidth
cross-domain transfer facility. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM
Symposium on Operating System Principles, pp. 189–202.
Druschel and Rowstron Druschel, P. and Rowstron, A. (2001). PAST: A large-scale, persistent
2001 peeer-to-peer storage utility. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on
Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS-VIII), Schloss Elmau,
Germany, May, pp. 75–80.
Dubois et al. 1988 Dubois, M., Scheurich, C. and Briggs, F.A. (1988). Synchronization,
coherence and event ordering in multiprocessors. IEEE Computer, Vol.
21, No. 2, pp. 9–21.
Dwork et al. 1988 Dwork, C., Lynch, N. and Stockmeyer, L. (1988). Consensus in the
presence of partial synchrony. Journal of the ACM, Vol. 35, No. 2, pp.
288–323.
Eager et al. 1986 Eager, D., Lazowska, E. and Zahorjan, J. (1986). Adaptive load sharing
in homogeneous distributed systems. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, Vol. SE-12, No. 5, pp. 662–675.
earth.google.com Google Earth. Home page.
Edney and Arbaugh 2003 Edney, J. and Arbaugh, W. (2003). Real 802.11 Security: Wi-Fi
Protected. Boston MA: Pearson Education.
Edwards and Grinter 2001 Edwards, W.K. and Grinter, R. (2001). At home with ubiquitous
computing: Seven challenges. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp 2001), Atlanta, GA,
Sep.–Oct., pp. 256–272.
Edwardset al. 2002 Edwards, W.K., Newman, M.W., Sedivy, J.Z., Smith, T.F. and Izadi, S.
(2002). Challenge: Recombinant computing and the speakeasy
approach. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom 2002), Atlanta, GA,
September, pp. 279–286.
