source: Books - all\ref_book1_distributed-and-cloud-computing_kaiHwang.pdf
method: pdf
sha256: 125df2b686d75df4fbc6e447406e1c330bd17f5512b797122baa6546e95c25f4
pages:  671
ocr:    6 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    300
----------------------------------------------------------------------
===== page 601 =====
Software agents and
advanced sensor
Miniaturization, power- fusion
efficient electronics, and
available spectrum
Teleoperation and
telepresence: Ability to
monitor and control
Physical-world
Ability of devices located distant objects
web
indoors to receive
geolocation signals Locating people and
everyday objects
Ubiquitous positioning
Surveillance, security,
healthcare, transport,
food safety, document
management
Vertical-market applications
Supply-chain helpers
2000
could be widely applied to personalize the interactions among humans, machines, and objects.
Artificial intelligence, computer vision, robotics, and telepresence can make our lives more auto-
mated in the future.
The IoT development could become more mature and more sophisticated in the next 15 years.
Figure 9.14 shows the major technology advances and key applications that may benefit from the
hcaer
ygolonhceT
578 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Cost reduction leading
to diffusion into 2nd
wave of applications
Demand for expedited
logistics
RFID tags for
facilitating routing,
inventorying, and loss
prevention
2010 2020
Time
FIGURE 9.14
TechnologyroadmapoftheInternetofthings.
(Source:SRIConsultingBusinessIntelligence)
Table 9.6 Enabling and Synergistic Technologiesfor theIoT
EnablingTechnologies SynergisticTechnologies
Machine-to-machineinterfaces Geotagging/geocaching
Protocolsofelectroniccommunication Biometrics
Microcontrollers Machinevision
Wirelesscommunication Robotics
RFID Augmentedreality
Energyharvestingtechnologies Telepresenceandadjustableautonomy
Sensorsandsensornetworks Liferecordersandpersonalblackboxes
Actuators Tangibleuserinterfaces
Positioningorlocationtechnology(GPS) Cleantechnologies
Softwareengineering Mirrorworlds


===== page 602 =====
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 579
IoT. For example, supply chains are now better supported than before. Vertical market applications
may represent the next wave of advances. Ubiquitous positioning is expected to become a reality as
we move toward 2020. Beyond that, a physical IoT may be in place in a global scale. These
advances will significantly upgrade human abilities, societal outcomes, national productivity, and
quality of life.
9.3.1.4 Architecture of the Internet of Things
The IoT system is likely to have an event-driven architecture. In Figure 9.15, IoT development is
shown with a three-layer architecture. The top layer is formed by driven applications. The appli-
cation space of the IoT is huge, and will be discussed in Section 9.4.1. The bottom layers repre-
sent various types of sensing devices: namely RFID tags, ZigBee or other types of sensors, and
road-mapping GPS navigators. The sensing devices are locally or wide-area-connected in the
form of RFID networks, sensor networks, and GPSes. Signals or information collected at these
sensing devices are linked to the applications through the cloud computing platforms at the mid-
dle layer.
The signal processing clouds are built over the mobile networks, the Internet backbone, and
various information networks at the middle layer. In the IoT, the meaning of a sensing event does
not follow a deterministic or syntactic model. In fact, the SOA model is adoptable here. A large
number of sensors and filters are used to collect the raw data. Various compute and storage clouds
and grids are used to process the data and transform it into information and knowledge formats.
The sensed information is used to put together a decision-making system for intelligence
Application Merchandise Environment Intelligent Tele- Intelligent Smart
layer tracking protection search medicine traffic home
Cloud computing
platform
Network
layer Mobile The Information
telecom Internet network
network
Sensor GPS
RFID network
Sensing
layer Road navigators
RFID label Sensor nodes
FIGURE9.15
ThearchitectureofanIoTconsistingofsensingdevicesthatareconnectedtovariousapplicationsviamobile
networks,theInternet,andprocessingclouds.


===== page 603 =====
580 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
applications. The middle layer is also considered as a Semantic web or grid. Some actors (services,
components, avatars) are self-referenced.
9.3.2 Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID)
RFID is applied with electronic labels or RFID tags on any objects being monitored or tracked. The
tagging may be applied to any objects, such as merchandise, tools, smartphones, computers, ani-
mals, or people. The purpose is to identify and track the objects using radio waves or sensing sig-
nals. Some tags can be read from tens or hundreds of meters away via a wireless reader. Most
RFID tags contain at least two major parts. One is an integrated circuit for storing and processing
information, modulating and demodulating a radio-frequency (RF) signal, and other special func-
tions. The other part is an antenna for receiving and transmitting the radio signals.
9.3.2.1 RFID Tags and Device Components
There are generally three types of RFID tags: active RFID tags containing a battery and transmitting
signals autonomously, passive RFID tags which have no battery and require an external source to
provoke signal transmission, and battery-assisted passive RFID tags which require an external
source to wake up the battery but have significantly higher forward link capability. Based on the
radio frequency used, the passive RFID tags operate with from low frequency (LF) to high fre-
quency (HF), ultra high frequency (UHF), and the microwave range. In terms of functionality, there
are three major components of RFID hardware:
(cid:129) RFID tag A tiny silicon chip attached to a small antenna.
(cid:129) Reader antenna Used to radiate the energy and then capture the return signal sent back from
the tag. It can be integrated with a handheld reader device or connected to the reader by cable.
(cid:129) Reader The devicestation that talks with the tags. Areader may support one ormoreantennae.
Resemblinganelectronicbarcode,areaderdevicecandetectsignalsevenwithoutalineofsight.
Some RFID readers can identify multiple objects concurrently. And some RFID tag-reader archi-
tectures support security features such as requiring a human operator to input a challenge code
before decoding an ID. RFID devices have varying sizes, power requirements, operating frequen-
cies, amounts of rewritable and nonvolatile storage, and software intelligence. They operate from a
few centimeters to hundreds of meters. However, larger devices having an internal power source
tend to operate at longer ranges. Conversely, very smaller devices have no internal power source.
9.3.2.2 How RFID Works
Innovations in RFID include active, semi-active, and passive RFID tags. These tags can store up to
2 KB of data and are composed of a microchip, antenna, and battery for active and semi-passive
tags. The tag’s components are enclosed within plastic, silicon, or sometimes glass. Data stored in
the microchip waits to be read. The tag’s antenna receives electromagnetic energy from an RFID
reader’s antenna. Using power from its internal battery or power harvested from the reader’s electro-
magnetic field, the tag returns radio signals back to the reader. The reader picks up the tag’s radio
signals and interprets the frequencies as meaningful data.
There are two ways to couple schemes in RFID tags: inductively coupled or capacitively
coupled. Figure 9.16 shows the RFID operations between the RFID tags (e-labels), reading/writing


===== page 604 =====
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 581
e-labels
Computer
EM
wave
Antenna
RS232 USB
WiFi or sensor
network Read/write
Base station devices
FIGURE9.16
RFIDtaggingandsignalsread/writethroughsensororWiFinetworks.
devices, and backend computers. RFID tags are still not in widespread use by ordinary people,
because they are expensive and bulky. They are more often used by large businesses, moving or
shipping companies, and service companies. However, RFID tags can make our daily life or work
much easier, more convenient, and accessible to visible or hidden objects surrounding us. These
tags are not that expensive to produce in large quantities, and they can be made small enough to fit
on almost any product or object.
External RF antenna devices can illuminate the tag devices similar to radar illuminating a target.
However, RFID is more effective at operating at shorter ranges. A variety of agencies are defining
the standards and regulating the use of RFID. They include the International Organization for Stan-
dardization (ISO), International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), ASTM International, DASH7
Alliance, and EPCglobal. RFID has many industrial applications including merchandise tracking
and supply chain management. Its use can improve the efficiency of inventory control and accuracy
of assembly line management. Active and semi-passive RFID tags use internal batteries to power
their circuits. An active tag can also use its own battery to broadcast radio waves to a reader,
whereas a semi-passive tag relies on the reader to supply its power for broadcasting.
Active and semi-passivetagsare reservedfor reading over30to 100 meters, ifrepeater batteries
are used to boost a tag’s range. For example, a customer finds a pair of jeans in her size on a store
shelfwitha radiowandprovided bythe store.Shecanordertheclothingandpayviahercell phone
withthehelpofanRFIDsetting.PassiveRFIDtagsrelyentirelyonthereaderastheirpowersource.
Thesetagsarereadonlyupto20feetaway.Theyhavelowerproductioncosts,meaningtheycanbe
applied to less expensive merchandise. These tags are manufactured to be disposable. Arailway car
mayapplyactiveRFIDtags.Abottleofshampoomayuseonlyapassivetag.
Another factor that influences the cost of RFID tags is data storage. There are three storage
types: read-write, read-only, and write-once-read-many (WORM). A read-write tag’s data can be
added to or overwritten. Read-only tags cannot be added to or overwritten. WORM tags can have
additional data added once, but they cannot be overwritten. Most passive RFID tags cost 7–20
cents each. Active and semi-passive tags are more expensive, and RFID manufacturers typically do
not quote prices for these tags without first determining their range, storage type, and quantity.


===== page 605 =====
582 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
The RFID industry’s goal is to get the cost of passive RFID tags down to 5 cents each once more
merchandisers adopt them.
9.3.3 Sensor Networks and ZigBee Technology
Today’s sensor networks are mostly wireless, and are known as wireless sensor networks (WSNs).
A typical WSN consists of spatially distributed autonomous sensors to cooperatively monitor physi-
cal or environmental conditions, such as temperature, sound, vibration, pressure, motion, or pollu-
tants. The development of wireless sensor networks was motivated by military applications such as
battlefield surveillance. WSN technology is now used in many industrial and civilian application
areas, including process monitoring and control, machine health monitoring, environment and habi-
tat monitoring, health care and home automation, and intelligent traffic control.
9.3.3.1 Wireless Sensor Networks
A WSN is a group of specialized transducers with a communications infrastructure intended to
monitor and record conditions at diverse locations. Commonly monitored parameters are tempera-
ture, humidity, pressure, wind direction and speed, illumination intensity, vibration intensity,
sound intensity, power-line voltage, chemical concentrations, pollutant levels, and vital body
functions. A sensor network consists of multiple detection stations called sensor nodes, each of
which is small, lightweight, and portable. Every sensor node is equipped with a transducer,
microcomputer, transceiver, and power source. The transducer generates electrical signals based
on sensed data.
The microcomputer processes and stores the sensor output. The transceiver, which can be hard-
wired or wireless, receives commands from a central computer and transmits data to that computer.
The power for each sensor node is derived from the electric utility or from a battery. A sensor node
may vary in size from that of a shoebox down to a dust grain. The cost of sensor nodes also varies
a lot, ranging from $100’s to a few pennies. Size and cost constraints on sensor nodes are often
decided by energy, memory, computational speed, and bandwidth of the sensors used.
9.3.3.2 Wireless Network Support for Ubiquitous Computing
Table 9.7 compares four classes of wireless networks for ubiquitous computing. The ZigBee net-
works are mainly used in low-cost and low-speed monitoring and control applications, such as
those used in a wireless home area network (WHAN). The GSM/GPRS or CDMA/1 networks are
cellular mobile networks that can cover a wide area for voice and data telecommunications. The
WiFi networks specified in the IEEE 802.11b standard. WiFi is used for wirelessly accessing the
Internet, reading e-mails, or conducting web page searches Bluetooth is mainly used for short-
distance wireless connection of computer peripherals (e.g., keyboard, mouse, printers, etc.). In terms
of data rate, WiFi is the fastest (54 Mbps for 802.11g network). The next is Bluetooth with
720 Kbps and 115 Kbps for the 2.5G GPRS mobile network. ZigBee has the slowest rate of 20–
250 Kbps. However, ZigBee has high reliability and low power/cost advantages.
Network self-organization is expected in a sensor network. Given the large number of nodes
and their potential placement in hostile locations, it is essential that the network be able to self-
organize; manual configuration is not feasible. Moreover, nodes may fail (either from lack of


===== page 606 =====
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 583
Table 9.7 Wireless Networksfor Supporting UbiquitousComputing
MarketName GSM/GPRS Bluetooth
Standard ZigBee802.15.4 CDMA/1XRTT WiFi802.11g 802.15.1
Applicationfocus Monitoringand Wideareavoice Web,e-mail, Cable
control anddata video replacement
SystemResources 4KB–32KB 18MB+ 1MB+ 250KB+
BatteryLife(days) 100–1,000+ 1–7 0.5–5 1–7
NetworkSize Unlimited(264) 1 32 7
Bandwidth(Kbps) 20–250 64–128+ 54,000+ 720
Range(meters) 1–100+ 1,000+ 1–100 1–10+
SuccessMetrics Reliability,power, Reach,quality Speed,flexibility Cost,
cost convenience
energy or from physical destruction), and new nodes may join the network. Therefore, the network
must be able to periodically reconfigure itself so that it can continue to function. Individual nodes
may become disconnected from the rest of the network, but a high degree of connectivity must be
maintained.
Collaborative signal processing is desired in a sensor network. To improve detection/estimation
performance, it is often quite useful to fuse data from multiple sensors. This data fusion requires
the transmission of data and control messages. A user may want to query an individual node or a
group of nodes for information collected in the region. Depending on the amount of data fusion per-
formed, it may not be feasible to transmit a large amount of the data across the network. Instead,
various local sink nodes will collect the data from a given area and create summary messages.
A query may be directed to the sink node nearest to the desired location.
9.3.3.3 Three Generations of Sensor Networks
Table 9.8 classifies WSNs into three generations over the past 30 years. The sensors used in the
first generation were mainly vehicle-placed or air-dropped single sensors. They were quite bulky,
like a shoebox, and weighed in the kilograms. Networks assumed only star or point-to-point topolo-
gies and were powered by large batteries that could last hours or days. In the second generation,
the sensors became smaller, like a pack of playing cards, and weighed in the grams, and worked
with AA batteries that lasted for days or weeks. They appear in client/server or P2P configurations.
The current generation are as large as dust particles, weigh only a negligible amount, and are used
in P2P networks for embedded and remote applications.
Wireless ad hoc sensor networks apply a large number of (mostly stationary) sensors: Aside
from the deployment of sensors on the ocean surface or the use of mobile, unmanned, robotic sen-
sors in military operations, most nodes in a smart sensor network are stationary. Networks of
10,000 or even 100,000 nodes are envisioned in the future. The scalability becomes a demand. Low
energy use is expected in the modern sensors. Since in many applications the sensor nodes will be
placed in a remote area, service of a node may not be possible. In this case, the lifetime of a node
is determined by the battery life, thereby requiring reduced energy expenditures or use of solar
energy to power the devices.


===== page 607 =====
584 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Table 9.8 Three Generations of Wireless Sensor Networks
FirstGeneration SecondGeneration ThirdGeneration
WSNFeatures (1990s) (2000s) (2010s)
Manufacturers Customconstructors CrossbowTechnology, Dust,Inc.,andothers
(e.g.,forTRSS) Inc.,SensoriaCorp.,
EmberCorp.
PhysicalSize Largeshoeboxandup Packofcardsto Dustparticle
shoebox
Weight Kilograms Grams Negligible
NodeArchitecture Separatesensing, Integratedsensing, Integratedsensing,
processing,and processing,and processing,and
communication communication communications
Topology Point-to-point,star Client/server,P2P P2P
PowerSupply Largebatteries;hours, AAbatteries;daysto Solar;monthstoyears
Lifetime days,andlonger weeks
Deployment Vehicle-placedorair-drop Hand-placed Embedded,sprinkled,
singlesensors leftbehind
9.3.3.4 ZigBee Network
The term “ZigBee” is originated from the behavior of honeybees when they return to the beehive.
Thisisahigh-levelcommunicationprotocolusingsmall,low-power,radio-basedsensorsasspecified
bytheIEEE802.15.4standard.Forexample,ZigBeedevicesareappliedinWHANsinwirelesslight
switchesandconsumerelectronicscontrolledbyshort-rangeradio.TheZigBeetechnologyissimpler
touseandlessexpensivethanBluetoothorWiFi.TheRFappliedinZigBeeresultsinlowdatarates,
long battery life, and secure networking. The low cost allows the technology to be widely deployed
in wireless control and monitoring applications. The low power usage allows a longer life with
smallerbatteries.Themeshnetworkingprovideshigheravailabilityandanextendedoperatingrange.
TherearethreedifferenttypesofZigBeedevices,aslistedhereandshowninFigure9.28:
(cid:129) ZigBee coordinator (ZC) This is the most capable ZigBee device serving as the coordinator or
the root of a ZigBee network. There is exactly one coordinator in each network since it is the
device that started the network. It is able to store information about the network, including
acting as the trust center and repository of security keys.
(cid:129) ZigBee Router (ZR) This can act as an intermediate router, passing on data from end device to
end device.
(cid:129) ZigBee End Device (ZED) This contains just enough functionality to talk to the parent node
(either the coordinator or the router). The end device cannot relay data from other devices. This
relationship allows the node to be asleep a significant amount of the time, thereby ensuring a
long battery life. A ZED requires the least amount of memory, and therefore can be less
expensive to manufacture than a ZR or ZC.
ZigBee devices are required to conform to the IEEE 802.15.4 Wireless Personal Area Network
(WPAN) standard. The standard specifies the lower protocol layers—the physical layer and
the MAC at the data link layer. This standard operates in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz (worldwide),


===== page 608 =====
ZigBee coordinator
ZigBee router
ZigBee end device
FIGURE9.17
StructureofatypicalZigBeenetwork.
(Source:http://mesh-matrix.com/en/technology/tech_zigbee.aspx)
Processing 915 MHz (Americas), and 868 MHz (Europe) radio
data acquisition bands. In the 2.4 GHz band there are 16 ZigBee
communication
channels, with each channel requiring 5 MHz of
bandwidth. A typical ZigBee network is illustrated
in Figure 9.17. The radios use direct-sequence
spread spectrum coding, which is managed by the
digital stream into the modulator.
The ZigBee has a data rate of 250 Kb/second
per channel in the 2.4 GHz band, 40 Kb/second per
channel in the 915 MHz band, and 20 Kb/second in
Sleep the 868 MHz band. Transmission range is between
10 and 75 meters. The output power of the radio is
Time generally around 1mW. The basic channel access
mode is Carrier Sense, Multiple Access/Collision
Avoidance (CSMA/CA). That is, the sensor nodes
talk in the same polite way that people converse.
They check to see that no one is talking before
they start. Therefore, the hidden-terminal problem
can be solved using a pair of RTS (request to send) and CTS (clear to send) handshaking signals
to avoid collision.
9.3.3.5 Power Management in Wireless Sensor Networks
The sensors in most WSNs are in sleep mode a majority of the time. As illustrated in Figure 9.18,
sleepingsensorsconsumeonlyafewµA.Theywakeupquicklytoprocessthesenseddataandreturn
to sleepagain. Active modeis verybrief,to minimize powerconsumption.Thisperiodic application
rewoP
puekaW
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 585
FIGURE9.18
Powermanagementinatypicalsensor
applicationpattern.


===== page 609 =====
586 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
pattern results in a long lifetime for the sensors (months or years) without changing batteries. Good
powermanagementisthekeytoWSNsuccess.
Example 9.7 Wireless Sensor Networks for Health Monitoring
Wireless sensors offer many possibilities for measuring different parameters of the human body and most
of them are imperceptible and comfortable to use. Wireless sensors and a large communication capacity
make it possible to measure people without inhibiting their everyday life; such wireless measurements are
being implemented in the Ubiquitous City. UWB and ZigBee solutions are studied widely in many coun-
tries all over the world, and thus they have become more popular in hospital and rehabilitation environ-
ments (seeFigure9.19).
Eventhoughawideselectionofcommercialsensorsareavailable,manyfactors—forexample,motion
artifactsandnoise—havetobeconsideredbeforeimplementingasensorintoanapplication.Alargenumber
ofmeasurementsandtestingwithallusedsensorsneedstobeperformedtomakesureallresultsarereliable
andreadytobeanalyzedbyahealthcareprofessional.Also,combiningandanalyzingalargeamountofdata
from different sensors needs a new kind of approach. In addition, implementing a noninvasive glucose
measurementunitintoawirelesshealthmonitoringsystemisbeingstudiedintensively.
Hospital
or
medical center
server PC
IEEE802.15.4/
ZigBee compliant
communications
Doctors
mobile PDA
Body
sensor Wearable devices
node (chest belt, wrist band, etc...) Cellular
networks
Patient’s
mobile phone Doctor’s
mobile phone
FIGURE 9.19
Anexampleofhowmeasureddatacanbetransferredtodoctorsormedicalprofessionalsusingawireless
sensornetwork.
(Source:www.infotech.oulu.fi/Annual/2007/pics/opme_19_sm.jpg)


===== page 610 =====
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 587
9.3.4 Global Positioning System (GPS)
Location-based service (LBS) helps people and machines find things and determine their physical
whereabouts. Sensors play a role in dead reckoning, but that approach does not satisfy practical
needs for geolocation. This has triggered the creation of global positioning and navigation systems.
The GPS was developed in 1973 by the U.S. Air Force. Similar developments also occurred in the
European Union, Russia, and China. Generally, the GPS is augmented by other signals and cellular
towers. Fixed or orbiting satellite transmitters broadcast timing signals and receiving device
response signals to locate the position of moving objects.
Radar, lidar, and sonar can all detect relative locations of things using electromagnetic, optical,
and acoustic signals. With help from satellites, some objects can be also located by attaching active
GPSdevicestodisclosetheirlocationsbyradio,light,and/orsound.Since1994,adegradedGPShas
beenmadeavailableforcivilianapplicationsinprovidingreliablepositioning,navigation,andtiming
services.ForanyonewithaGPSreceiver,thesystemwillprovideaccuratelocationandtimeinforma-
tionforanunlimitednumberofusersinallweatherconditions,dayandnight,anywhereintheworld.
9.3.4.1 How GPS works
GPS consists of three parts: the space segment, control segment, and user segment. The U.S. Air
Force develops, maintains, and operates the space and control segments. There are 24 satellites
deployed around the Earth in fixed orbits. The satellites orbit at an altitude of approximately 20,200
KM. GPS satellites broadcast signals from space, by which each GPS receiver calculates its 3D
location (latitude, longitude, and altitude) plus the current time. The space segment is composed of
24 satellites in medium Earth orbit and also includes the boosters required to launch them into
orbit. GPS satellites circle Earth twice a day in very precise orbits and transmit signals to Earth.
GPS devices on the ground receive these signals and use a triangulation method to calculate the
user’s exact location. At different times, different satellites will become visible to the receiver.
As shown in Figure 9.20, the control segment is composed of a master control station and a host
of dedicated and shared ground antennas and monitor stations. The user segment is composed of
hundreds of thousands of U.S. and allied military users of the secure GPS precise positioning ser-
vices. Tens of millions of civil, commercial, and scientific users are only allowed to use a degraded
functionality of the so-called standard positioning services that cannot be used in hostile attack pur-
poses. Essentially, the GPS receiver compares the time a signal was transmitted by a satellite with
the time it was received. The time difference tells the GPS receiver how far away the satellite is.
With distance measured from several satellites, the receiver can determine the user’s position and
display it on the unit’s electronic map.
9.3.4.2 Passive versus Active GPSes
The GPS tracking device makes it possible to track people, vehicles, and other assets, anywhere on
Earth.TherearetwotypesofGPStrackingsystems:passiveandactive.Inpassivetracking,theGPS
is just a receiver, not a transmitter. Passive GPS tracking devices lack a transmission capability to
send theGPS data from the vehicle. Therefore, passive GPS is also known as data loggers used pri-
marilyasrecordingdevices.ActiveGPStrackingunitsincorporateamethodtotransmituserinforma-
tionfromavehicle.Althoughsatelliteuplinkofdataisavailable,cellulardatacommunicationisthe
most common and cost-effective. Automatic incremental updating provides a continuous source of
trackingthroughoutarecordingperiod.Thisprovidescurrentaswellashistoricalloggingpositions.


===== page 611 =====
588 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
EGNOS satellite
GPS satellite
Correction
signal
Master station
Reference station
FIGURE 9.20
ThegroundGPSreceiver,whichcalculatesits3Dlocationfromfourormoresatelliteswithhelpfromafew
groundreferencestationsandamasterstation.
Passive GPS tracking devices store GPS location data in their internal memory which can then
be downloaded to a computer for viewing at a later time, while active GPS tracking systems send
the data at regular intervals to be viewed in real time. When real-time data is not required, passive
GPS tracking devices tend to be favored more by individual consumers for their compact conveni-
ence and affordability. Concerned parents can install a GPS tracking unit just about anywhere in
their teens’ vehicles to monitor their driving habits and know where they’ve been going, and even
law enforcement officials now rely on passive GPS tracking to trail criminal suspects and enhance
civilian safety via electronic surveillance of parolees. Passive GPS tracking units also serve as a
theft prevention and retrieval aid in consumer as well as commercial vehicles.
9.3.4.3 Operating Principles of GPS
Knowing the distance from the receiver to a fixed-position satellite implies that the receiver is on
the surface of a sphere centered at the satellite. With four satellites, the receiver location is detected
at the intersection of four sphere surfaces. The intersection of two satellite spheres is a circle in gen-
eral. This circle could be reduced to a single point, if the two spheres merely touch on their sur-
faces. Having found those two intersecting sphere surfaces, now we consider how the intersecting
circle intersects with a third satellite signal sphere. A circle and a sphere surface intersect at zero,
one, or two points. With the receiver on the surface of Earth, the receiver needs to choose the point
which is closest to the receiver from at most two intersecting points.
Obviously, this triangulation method may result in some errors in narrowing down to exactly
one point with a minimum of inaccuracy. To locate the point accurately, the receiver has to use a
fourth satellite to hone in almost precisely. The fourth satellite sphere will come very close to the


===== page 612 =====
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 589
final two intersecting points of three satellite spheres. The final receiver location is thus decided by
noting the closest point calculated from the two final points to the sphere surface of the fourth satel-
lite. In the case of no error, the precise position is located. Otherwise, some offset—say, 10 meters
from the exact location—could be resulted from the error introduced. To further reduce the errors,
more satellites could be involved, but this could be rather costly.
Each satellite continually transmits messages that include the time the message was transmitted,
preciseorbitalinformation(theephemeris),andthegeneralsystemhealthandroughorbitsofallGPS
satellites(thealmanac).AGPSreceivercalculatesitspositionbypreciselytimingthesignalssentby
GPSsatelliteshighaboveEarth.AGPSreceivermustbelockedontothesignalofatleastthreesatel-
litestocalculatea2Dposition(latitudeandlongitude)andtrackmovement.Withfourormoresatel-
litesinview,thereceivercandeterminetheuser’s3Dposition(latitude,longitude,andaltitude).
Once the user’s position has been determined, the GPS unit can calculate other information,
such as speed, bearing, track, trip distance, distance to destination, sunrise and sunset times, and
more. The receiver utilizes the messages it receives to determine the transit time of each message
and computes the distances to each satellite. These distances along with the satellites’ locations are
used to compute the position of the receiver. This position is displayed perhaps with a moving map
display or latitude, longitude, and elevation information. Many GPS units show derived information
such as direction and speed calculated from positional changes.
9.3.4.4 Triangulation Location Calculation
This location calculation method is illustrated in Figure 9.20. The receiver uses messages received
from four satellites to determine the satellite positions and time sent. The x, y, and z components of
position and the time sent are designated as [x, y, z, t], where the index i = 1, 2, 3, or 4 to denote
i i i i
the satellite. Knowing when the message was received t , the receiver computes the message’s tran-
ri
sit time as t – t. Assuming the message traveled at the speed of light c, the distance traveled is
ri i
calculated by d = (t – t) × c.
i ri i
Having discussed how sphere surfaces intersect, we now formulate the equations for the case
when errors are present. Let b denote the clock error or bias, the amount by which the receiver’s
clock is off. The receiver has four unknowns, the three components of GPS receiver position and
the clock bias [x, y, z, b]. The equation of the sphere surfaces is calculated by the following expres-
sion for i = 1, 2, 3, and 4:
ðx−xÞ2+ðy−yÞ2+ðz−zÞ2 =ð½tr +b−t(cid:2)cÞ2 (9.6)
i i i i i
Multidimensional root finding methods such as the Newton-Raphson method can be used. The
approachistolinearizearoundan approximatesolution—say,[x(k),y(k),z(k),b(k)],atiterationk,then
solve four linear equations derived from the quadratic equations above to obtain the corresponding
values at time instance of k+1. The Newton-Raphson method converges faster than other position
methods.Whenmorethanfoursatellitesareavailable,thecalculationcanchoosefromfourpossible
results.Theerrorofpositioncalculationisverysensitivetotheclockerror.Therefore,inthesatellite-
basednavigationsystem,clocksynchronizationiscriticallyimportanttominimizelocationerrors.
Three satellites are enough to locate the receiver position, since space has three dimensions and
a position near Earth’s surface is assumed. However, even a very small clock error multiplied by
the light speed of satellite signals may result in a large positional error. Therefore, most receivers
use four or more satellites to solve for the receiver’s location and time. The computed time is often


===== page 613 =====
590 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
hidden by most GPS applications, which use only the location information. A few specialized GPS
applications do use the time for time transfer, traffic signal timing, and synchronization of cell
phone base stations.
Although four satellites are required for normal operation, if one dimensional variable is already
known, a receiver can determine its position using only three satellites. For example, a ship or plane
mayhaveknownelevation.SomeGPSreceiversmayuseadditionalcluesorassumptions(suchasreus-
ingthelastknownaltitude,deadreckoning,inertialnavigation,orincludinginformationfromthevehi-
clecomputer)togivealessaccurate(degraded)positionwhenfewerthanfoursatellitesareavailable.
9.3.4.5 Worldwide Deployment Status
In addition to the GPS deployed by the United States which is now open for global civilian applica-
tions by many countries, Russia has deployed GLONASS (for Global Navigation Satellite System)
for Russian military use exclusively. In the European Union, there is the Gallio positioning system
(EGNSS). By 2011, China had launched 8 satellites for the 31-satellite Beidou navigation system.
The full Beidou system will become operational by 2020.
Civilian GPS applications include navigation, surveying, mapmaking, cellular phones, tectonics,
disaster relief and emergency services, GPS tours, geofencing, recreation, aircraft tracking, and geo-
tagging, among other. Military applications of GPS include navigation, target tracking, missile and
projectile guidance, search and rescue, reconnaissance, and nuclear detonation detection, among
others. The following example shows a civilian application.
Example 9.8 Real-Time Vehicle Tracking Using Active GPS Devices
Active GPS tracking systems find their applications primarily in industries and businesses. These systems
are fast becoming the standard for companies that wish to monitor fleet vehicles as well as other heavy
equipment. Real-time GPS tracking is practical for acquiring immediate and detailed information about
large numbers of vehicles or objects that are being tracked. An example is a car rental business that pro-
vides cars for many customers; real-time vehicle tracking systems could prove beneficial in supplying cur-
rent and historical data on routes taken by all the drivers. The process is divided into the following four
steps:
1. GPSreceivers ineachcar assetreceive signals from anetwork ofsatellites.
2. Thecollectedsatellite informationis senttothe communication center viamobile networks.
3. Thecontrol centerenterscalculatedlocation informationoverglobal maps.
4. The control center sends commands to each unit to trigger alarms, stop engines, change direction, or
sendpersonalmessages, andsoon.
9.4 INNOVATIVE APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET OF THINGS
In this section, we will review the application domains of the IoT. In particular, case study exam-
ples of the IoT are reported for applications in tracking, retailing, supply chain management, smart
power grid, and smart buildings. Finally, European IoT projects are assessed along with American
cyber-physical system (CPS) projects for general-purpose applications.


===== page 614 =====
9.4 Innovative Applications of the Internet of Things 591
Table 9.9 Some ApplicationDomains of theInternet of Things
Domain BriefDescriptions IndicativeExamples
Growthin Activitiesinvolvingfinancialorcommercial Manufacturing,logistics,servicesector,
industryand transactionsbetweencompaniesand banking,financialgovernmentalauthorities,
economy organizations intermediaries,etc.
Environment Activitiesregardingtheprotection, Agricultureandbreeding,recycling,
andnatural monitoring,anddevelopmentofallnatural environmentalmanagementservices,
resources resources energymanagement,etc.
Societyand Activities/initiativesregardingthe Governmentalservicestowardcitizensand
dailylife developmentandinclusionofsocieties, societystructures,e-inclusion(aging,
cities,andpeople disabledpeople),etc.
9.4.1 Applications of the Internet of Things
Table 9.9 summarizes IoT applications in three major civilian application domains. Obviously, the
IoT has a lot of military applications, which is beyond the scope of this book. In general, use of the
IoT aims to promote industrial productivity and raise economical growth. The IoT plays important
roles in environment protection, including pollution control, weather forecasting, and disaster avoid-
ance and recovery. In terms of societal impacts, the IoT can make our lives more convenient and
comfortable. Government services, law enforcement, and home and health improvements are the
major beneficiaries.
9.4.1.1 Specific Wireless Sensor Applications
Highlighted below are several applications of sensor networks:
(cid:129) Military sensor networks to detect and gain as much information as possible about enemy
movements, explosions, and other phenomena of interest
(cid:129) Sensor networks to detect and characterize chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and
explosive attacks and materials
(cid:129) Sensornetworkstodetectandmonitorenvironmentalchangesinplains,forests,oceans,andsoon
(cid:129) Wireless traffic sensor networks to monitor vehicle traffic on highways or in congested parts of
a city
(cid:129) Wireless surveillance sensor networks for providing security in shopping malls, parking garages,
and other facilities
(cid:129) Wireless parking lot sensor networks to determine whether the lot is occupied or available
9.4.2 Retailing and Supply-Chain Management
IoT applications will promote business, improve our society, and enhance economical growth.
These include specific IoT applications in railing and logistics services and supply chain manage-
ment. Many industrial, government, and community services can benefit from these applications.
These include activities or initiatives to promote the development of better and more efficient socie-
ties, cities, and governments.


===== page 615 =====
592 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.4.2.1 Retailing and Logistics Services
Emergence of RFID applications depends strongly on adoption by retailers, logistics organiza-
tions, and package-delivery companies. In particular, retailers may tag individual objects in
order to solve a number of problems at once: accurate inventorying, loss control, and ability to
support unattended walk-through point of sale terminals (which promise to speed checkout
while reducing both shoplifting and labor costs). Cold-chain auditing and assurance could
require tagging food and medicine with temperature-sensitive materials and/or electronics; ensur-
ing or monitoring whether perishable materials are intact and/or need attention may entail com-
munications among things, refrigeration systems, automated data logging systems, and human
technicians.
For example, at the grocery store, you buy a carton of milk. The milk container would have an
RFID tag that stores the milk’s expiration date and price. When you lift the milk from the shelf, the
shelf would display the milk’s specific expiration date, or the information could be wirelessly sent
to your personal digital assistant or cell phone. The idea is illustrated in Figure 9.25. As you exit
the store, you pass through doors with an embedded tag reader. This reader would tabulate the cost
of all the items in your shopping cart and send the grocery bill to your bank. Product manufacturers
would know what you’ve bought and the store’s computers would know exactly how much of each
product needs to be reordered.
Once you get home, you would put your milk in the refrigerator, which is equipped with a tag
reader. This smart refrigerator would be capable of tracking all of the groceries stored in it. It
would be able to track the food you use and how often you restock your refrigerator, and could let
you know when that milk and other food spoils. Products would also be tracked when they are
thrown into a trash can or recycle bin. Based on the products you buy, your grocery store would
get to know your unique preferences. Instead of receiving generic newsletters with weekly grocery
specials, you might receive one created just for you.
9.4.2.2 Supply Chain Management
Supply chain management can be aided by an IoT system. The idea is to manage a whole network
of related businesses or partners involved in product manufacturing, delivery, and services as
required by end customers. At any given time, market forces could demand changes from suppliers,
logistics providers, locations and customers, and any number of specialized participants in a supply
chain. This variability has significant effects on the supply chain infrastructure, ranging from the
foundation layers of establishing the electronic communication between the trading partners to the
more complex configuration of the processes and the arrangement of workflows that are essential to
a fast production process.
A supply line combines the processes, methodologies, tools, and delivery options to guide colla-
borative partners to work in a sequence to conduct business with high efficiency and delivery
speed. The cooperative companies must work in lock-step quickly as the complexity and speed of
the supply chain increase due to the effects of global competition, rapid price fluctuations, surging
of oil prices, short product life cycles, expanded specialization, and talent scarcity. A supply chain
is an efficient network of facilities that procures materials, transforms these materials to finished
products, and finally distributes the finished products to customers. The following example could
explain how the supply chain can be aided by the IoT, which is particularly tailored to promote
business efficiency and fast growth.


===== page 616 =====
9.4 Innovative Applications of the Internet of Things 593
Example 9.9 Supply Chain Management Aided by the Internet of Things
Supply chain management is a process used by companies to ensure that their supply chain is efficient
and cost-effective. Figure 9.21 illustrates the supply chain for the production and sale of consumer pro-
ducts. The supply chain involves material or component suppliers, distribution centers, communication
links, cloud data centers, a large number of retail stores, corporate headquarters (e.g., Wal-Mart), and
bank payments. These business partners are linked by satellite, Internet, wired and wireless networks,
truck, train, or shipping companies, and electronic banking, cloud providers, and so on. Sensors, RFID
tags, and GPS devices could be placed everywhere along the supply chain. The idea is to promote online
business, e-commerce, or mobiletransactions. Supply chainmanagement consists offive majorstages:
(cid:129) Stage 1:Planningand Coordination A planorstrategy must bedevelopedto address howa goodor
service cansatisfy the needsof customers.
(cid:129) Stage 2:Materialand EquipmentSupplies Thisphaseinvolves building a strongrelationship withthe
rawmaterial suppliers andplanningmethods forshipping, delivery,and payment.
Sale scanned at
checkout
Store
replenishment Store forecast
updated
Delivery
to store Store demand
generated
Delivery loaded & Stock ordered
dispatched from supplier
Goods Supplier delivers
picked to depot
Goods received
and unloaded
FIGURE9.21
Supplychainmanagementinthemultipartnerbusinessarena.
(CourtesyIGDAcademy)
[image text] Mitnn


===== page 617 =====
594 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
(cid:129) Stage 3:Manufacturing and Testing The productis tested, manufactured, andscheduled fordelivery.
(cid:129) Stage 4:Delivery of Products Customer ordersare takenanddelivery of goodsisplanned.
(cid:129) Stage 5:After-Sale Serviceand Returns Customers mayreturn defectiveproducts and thecompany
addressescustomers’ demands.Supply chainsoftware is usedby manycompaniesfor efficient supply
chainmanagement.
9.4.3 Smart Power Grid and Smart Buildings
Environmental protection is a global issue. Green energy is desired to save energy and to reduce the
effects of global warming. A critical IoT application is promotion of a smart power grid.
9.4.3.1 Smart Power Grid
Various power companies across the United States have or are in the process of upgrading their
power management and distribution systems. Various sensors at individual homes (smart thermo-
stats) can collect information that is sent via a network to main stations (perhaps even local “hubs”)
that can apply complex power management and send control signals back to the grid to save
energy. The smart grid is made possible by applying sensing, measurement, and control devices to
electricity production, transmission, distribution, and consumption.
Example 9.10 A Smart Power Grid Supporting the Internet of Things
A smart grid includes an intelligent monitoring system that keeps track of all electricity flowing in the sys-
tem. Smart meters, a digital upgrade of current utility meters, track energy usage in real time so that both
the customer and the utility company know how much is being used at any given time. Energy is paid for
using “time of day” pricing, meaning electricity will cost more at peak times of use. Figure 9.22 illustrates
IoT support of asmart power grid.
For example, when power is least expensive the user can allow the smart grid to turn on selected
home appliances such as washing machines or factory processes that can run at arbitrary hours. At peak
times it could turn off selected appliances to reduce demand. More involved users would be able to use
the smart meter to view energy usage remotely and make real-time decisions about energy consumption.
A refrigerator or airconditioning systemcouldbeturned down remotely whileresidentsare away.
9.4.3.2 Smart Buildings
The IoT could enhance our lives with comfort, convenience, and security, and reduce energy costs
and environmental impacts. The IoT has been suggested in construction of smart buildings in resi-
dential, commercial, industrial, and government settings. This may include alarm systems, access
controls, indoor climate controls, elevators, and so forth. We desire to diffuse IT into lighting, appli-
ances, and furniture in buildings. A smart building can be a shopping mall or a home, a hospital or
a high-rise office tower. Smart buildings need monitoring and regulation of heating, air condition-
ing, lighting, and environmental changes. They can oversee building security, fire suppression, and
elevator operations. Smart building technologies focus on bringing more detailed monitoring and
sensing “awareness” to buildings.


===== page 618 =====
9.4 Innovative Applications of the Internet of Things 595
A “smart grid” is a digital energy
system that uses new technology to Home energy sources feed
incorporate clean energy and provide into the same grid as major
more efficient, reliable electricity. suppliers, and customers
are reimbursed for energy
contribution.
Users view their energy usage in
real time from any computer and
make decisions about what is on
Solar panels, wind or off while they are away.
farms and other
sources of energy
feed into the grid.
Users decide when outlets are
in use; e.g., refrigerators could
be turned to a lower setting at
night or during the day.
The utility The smart meter
company is able tracks when
to pinpoint customers use
problems in the electricity, which
grid so service is is more expen-
more reliable. sive during peak
usage hours.
FIGURE9.22
Smartpowergrid.
(Source:http://impactnews.com/images/stories/CTA/2009/04/15-grid.jpg.Courtesyof:CommunityImpactNewspaper)
9.4.4 Cyber-Physical System (CPS)
Computers have become pervasive and ubiquitous. Computing devices appear in TV remote con-
trols, smartphones iPods, elevators, escalators, windshield wipers, thermostats in offices/homes, and
traffic lights at intersections. These devices are so common in our daily lives that we do not even
think of them as computers. Technical people refer to these devices embedded systems that perform
one or more dedicated functions. With the advent of smartphones, GPS navigators, and tablet
computers, embedded systems are turning into a new class of intelligent systems, known as cyber-
physical systems.
A cyber-physical system (CPS) is an embedded system which integrates the computing process
with the physical world as an interactive and intelligent system. CPSes appear in many computer
and TV game systems. The best example is the popular Nintendo Wii interactive gaming system.
Cursor-based CPSes can be found in the automotive, aerospace, health care, robotics, manufactur-
ing, battlefield training, and consumer appliance industries, among others. Thus, a full-fledged CPS
involves embedded computers, network monitors, and intelligent control of physical processes with
humans in the feedback loop. In the physical world, man-machine interactions must be handled in
real time by a CPS. Figure 9.23 shows the abstraction architecture of a typical CPS.
A CPS features tight coordination between the system’s computational and physical elements.
Today, most virtual reality systems tend to focus more on computational elements than on the
intense link between the computational and physical elements. To amend this shortcoming, a CPS
[image text] AUSTIN


===== page 619 =====
596 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Sensor network
Cyberspace of Physical world under
embedded systems sensing and tracking
Man-machine
interface
Human interaction in
real time
FIGURE 9.23
ThreemajorcomponentsworkinginteractivelyandintelligentlyinaCPS.
should be designed as a network of interacting elements with physical input and output instead of
as a stand-alone device. The notion is extended from the concepts of robotics and sensor networks.
The expectation from the CPS community is to improve the link between computational and physi-
cal elements. The design objectives include the adaptability, autonomy, efficiency, functionality,
reliability, safety, and usability of future CPSes.
These three components interact with one another heavily. Sensor networks and man-machine
interfaces need to be established to glue the three sectors together. In a CPS, the cyberspace and
physical worlds are intertwined. The embedded computing, sensed real-world data, and real-time
responses are all equally important. New understandings and techniques are needed to deal with
this new fusion. New advances are desired to broaden the potential of CPSes in several dimensions.
One is human intervention at the right moment, such as collision avoidance in driving a vehicle.
Doctors need precision in robotic surgery and workers need nano-level manufacturing.
It is desired to design CPSes to replace humans in dangerous or inaccessible environments such
as battlefields, rescue from earthquake rubble, and deep-sea exploration. Users demand close coordi-
nation in air traffic control and war fighting and enhanced efficiency and augmentation of human
capabilities in health care monitoring and life-saving operations. Since 2006, the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) has identified CPS as a key area of research. The NSF and other federal
agencies have sponsored several workshops on CPS in recent years.
The applications of CPS typically fall under sensor-based systems and autonomous systems. For
example, many wireless sensor networks monitor some aspect of the environment and relay the pro-
cessed information to a central node. Other types of CPSes include autonomous automotive sys-
tems, medical monitoring, process control systems, distributed robotics, and automatic pilot
avionics. The following example gives new directions of CPS applications.
Example 9.11 Distributed Robotic Garden Project at MIT
Researchers involved in a distributed robotic garden project at MIT have experimented on a set of robots
to tend a garden of tomato plants. This system combines collaborative work in distributed sensing (each
plant is equipped with a sensor node monitoring its status), navigation, manipulation, and wireless net-
working. The long-term goal is to implement an autonomous greenhouse based on autonomous robots


===== page 620 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 597
and sensors. Emphasis of the project is on scalability and robustness. The solution was fully distributed
with simpleindividual components.
The MIT research group constructed a mobile end-effector to manipulate the robotic garden. They
installed intelligent pots to provide distributed sensing and data storage in the system. They consider
plants, pots, and robots to be systems with different levels of mobility, sensing, actuation, and autonomy.
The system transforms energy, water, and nutrients into production. The system studies important pro-
blems in multirobot coordination, force-feedback grasping, and spatial computing. The MIT research group
envisions the following long-term applications oftheir CPSwork:
(cid:129) Sustainable, organicagriculture Usinga large number ofrobotsand embedding intelligenceenables
large-scale heterogeneousplant populationsthat areless prone todeplete the soilof specificnutrients
andmight allowfor reductionof pesticides byintelligent localcombinations ofplants. Also, on-demand
watering canreduce waterconsumption.
(cid:129) Autonomous farms Providing avariety of products onasmall scalein a fully autonomous fashion
enableslong-term deployments ofhuman populations onremote areasandouterspacemissions.
(cid:129) Greenarchitecture Fruitsandvegetablescanbecultivatedontheinsideandoutsideofbuildingswhere
theypositivelycontributetoroomclimateandenergyefficiency,andsupporttheinhabitants’diet.
Many scientific areas could be blended together to realize truly intelligent CPSes in addition to
embedded and real-time systems. These areas include avionics, automobiles, power systems, control
theory, and electro-mechanical engineering, among others. It has been suggested that CPS be a
priority area for R&D in federal networking and information technology in the United States.
9.5 ONLINE SOCIAL AND PROFESSIONAL NETWORKING
Online social networking enables many socialand professionalfunctions overtheInternet.Through
dedicated websites,P2Pconnectionscanbe easilyestablished.Socialnetworkinghasalreadytrans-
formed the way in which people interact in cyberspace. Social networking web sites such as Face-
book, Twitter, LinkedIn, and MySpace are popular today. They provide online services that allow
userstocreateonlineprofile pagesand makefriendswiththosewhoare registeredon thesame web
site. According to a recent global Internet traffic report, there were almost 1 billion registered users
amongthetop15socialnetworks(www.ebizmba.com/articles/social-networking-websites).
In early 2011, Facebook was ranked at the top, exceeding 600 million monthly visitors. The
connectivity among the social network’s users and the community behind each special interest
group can be analyzed by large-scale graph theory. A graph-theoretical approach is presented to
analyzing social networks. The purpose is to evaluate social network profiles, user demographics,
security measures, networking features, and search and technical support provided. As case studies,
two social networks are examined: namely Facebook for sharing photos and making friends and
Twitter for microblogging and exchange of ideas.
9.5.1 Online Social Networking Characteristics
Online social networks (OSNs) are formed with individuals or organizations over the Internet. These
individual or organizational entities are related, connected, or associated special interests or specific


===== page 621 =====
598 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
interdependencies. These include personal friendships, kinships, professional orientations, common
interests, financial exchange, like or dislike relationships, community or racial groups, religious or
political beliefs, knowledge or prestige, and celebrity fans. In general, social networks are formed
by complex sets of interpersonal to international relationships among members of our societies or
communities on Earth.
A social network is a structure representing the social relationships of individuals. In a social
network, nodes represent the individuals, and the ties between the nodes represent the relationships
such as friendship, kinship, and colleagueship [3]. OSN services are built to reflect the social rela-
tionships among people. Social networking services are a communication tool among people. Before
these services, online communities that acted as early online social network services did exist—an
example is the bulletin board service (BBS). However, traditional online communities are group-
oriented, which means users are organized in different groups based on different interests and
regions, while modern social networking web sites are always individual-oriented.
9.5.1.1 Online Social Networking Services
An OSN offers special social or professional services through Internet access and web services.
These social networking services are linked by Internet communication among people. Early online
social network services include job hunting, dating, and BBSes. Traditional online communities are
organized in different groups based on different interests and regions, while modern social network-
ing web sites are always individual-oriented or follow P2P interactions. Here are some ideas for
providing OSN services:
(cid:129) Personal page or profiles for each user linked by social connections
(cid:129) Social graph traversal along specific social links or networks
(cid:129) Communication tools among participants or registered users
(cid:129) Ability to share music, photos, and videos with friends or professional groups
(cid:129) Operation of a community in special niche areas like health care, sports, and hobbies
(cid:129) Customized software tools or databases are used in OSN services
(cid:129) Strong customer loyalty and fast membership growth are seen
(cid:129) Provider revenue from embedded advertisement and access to premium content
9.5.1.2 Social Networking Properties
In most social networks, each user has a personal page (or profile), which is linked via the user’s
socialrelationships.Thisiswhymodernsocialnetworkingwebsitesareindividual-oriented.Oncea
useracceptsotherusersas“friends,”hewillbeabletoaccessallpermittedcontentsonthosefriends’
profile pages.Also, users canaccess their friends’listsoffriends,and viewtheir profile pages. This
is an example of social graph traversal. Commonly, online social networking web sites provide two
basiccommunicationmethods:internale-mail-likedirectmessagesandpublicmessageboards.Also,
userscanshareinformation,suchasphotos,videos,weblinks,andarticleswithfriends.Allthepop-
ular online social networking web sites have these four essential items, but the way they implement
thesefeaturesisdifferentbasedonthedifferentservicemodelsandmarketorientations.
However, logically the structure of social networks is P2P-based. Modern popular social net-
works apply mostly a client/server architecture that is open to the general public. This has led to
many problems such as privacy violations, service availability, system stability, network scalability,
and response performance. The service models and functionalities of Facebook and Twitter are


===== page 622 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 599
studied. Users need to understand why they are so successful. To discover the problems they have
caused in cyberspace, users need to generate effective solutions without degrading network
performance.
9.5.1.3 Representative Online Social Networks
Table 9.10 summarizes the top 5 popular OSNs based on the number of registered users. Social net-
working web sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and MySpace are extremely popular today. Logically,
social networking services are P2P networks. However, most of these web sites are installed with a
client/server architecture where the large number of servers form the data center. The five attributes
of QoS are weighted equally to yield the overall rating with a maximum score of 5 with 5 being a
perfect site and 3 being an average site.
Any social network with a rating above 4.0 is considered very good. These attributes could also
be weighted differently to yield different ranking results, depending on the application domain
applied. This means all the data, including blog entries, photos, videos, and social network relation-
ships, is stored and managed on central server clusters owned by the service providers. Although
the traditional architecture has advantages in scalability, because users can access their data from
any client including fixed machines or mobile devices, there are some implementation problems
too. For instance, private personal information could be lost, and large server clusters need to be
monitored during usage rush hours.
Table 9.10 Assessmentof TopFiveSocial Networking WebSitesin April2011
Brief
Description
Name and Registered Personal Privacy Networking Search Overall
(Year) WebSite Users Profiles Security Features Support Rating
Facebook Contentsharing 600M 4.5 4 5 4.5 4.51
2004 withlarge
numberofapps;
www.facebook
.com/
Skype Videotelephony 521M 3 4 4 3 3.50
2003 andinstant
messaging;
www.skype
.com
YouTube Videoclips 500M 3 3 3 4.5 3.38
2005 forwardingand
sharingweb
site;www
.youtube.com
Twitter Micro-blogging, 175M 3 4 5 5 4.25
2006 news,and
alerts;www
.twitter.com
MySpace Customized 130M 5 3 5 4 3.75
2003 socialservices;
www.myspace
.com


===== page 623 =====
600 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.5.1.4 Online Social Networks
A typical OSN platform architecture. It is desirable to customize an OSN to sustain competition in
this field. The social network provider should choose a brand name with its own API interfaces and
profile variables. The chosen forum categories must be relevant to the sufficiently large user com-
munity. The OSN platform must include specific functionalities that make it easy for users to join
and enjoy the services. Furthermore, the provider must prove the online marketing concept to attract
members to join and leave freely. Highly sophisticated software, virtualized data centers, or proces-
sing and storage cloud platforms are needed.
Asanon-demandserviceprovider,theOSNplatformshouldbeappealingtoallWeb2.0commu-
nities. The social network community must operate reliably with high availability and performance.
Logically, the OSN provides a P2P platform. However, modern popular social networking services
areallbuiltwiththeclient/serverarchitectureforeasymanagementandmaintenance.Thismeansthat
all blog entries, photos, videos, and social network relationships are stored and managed by private
clouds ownedbythe service providers. Alarge socialnetwork site must maintain huge datacenters.
Toserveclientsbetter,manyofthedatacentersarevirtualizedtoprovidecloudservices.
9.5.1.5 Social Network Benefits
Editorial web sites often include a forum already immersed in Web 2.0 services. Forums are valu-
able but lack the attraction to deliver the same level of value as social network communities.
A full-blown social network community can be built around a forum to result in the following four
operational benefits:
(cid:129) High return visit rate Users return to the social network community frequently. This opens up
the opportunity for great page impressions and a huge advertising inventory.
(cid:129) User loyalty Users connect to their friends and will not abandon them easily. They do not
move over to a competing social network. Instead, they show high customer loyalty.
(cid:129) Virtual growth Members invite their friends to the social network community. This is effective
marketing at a low cost, and the OSN grows by itself.
(cid:129) Business model With a social network community you can earn revenues through subscriptions
to premium content in addition to advertising revenues.
Twitter does not completely copy all the offline relationships onto the web sites. Hence, the
attraction to use Twitter is far less than Facebook at present (2010). On the other hand, Facebook is
not as open as Twitter. These features make people trust Facebook more than Twitter. Last but not
least, Facebook is more complex in functionality than Twitter. Although Twitter has plenty of third-
party applications, Twitter is still not convenient for beginning users. Facebook has embedded
many common features. If someone does not like to explore third-party applications for some com-
mon functions, she would go to Facebook instead of Twitter, based on the current trend.
9.5.2 Graph-Theoretic Analysis of Social Networks
Social network analysis has emerged as a key technique in modern sociology. It has also gained a
lot of attention in anthropology, biology, communication, economics, geography, information
science, organizational studies, social psychology, and sociolinguistics. Characterizing the existing
relationship among a person’s social group is the main task in social network analysis. Also, users


===== page 624 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 601
are facing a so-called “small-world” society, where all people are related in a short chain of social
acquaintances, one way or another. All social networks are not so chaotic or random as once
assumed, but rather have underlying structures. Some of the social networking rules or behaviors
are analyzed in this section.
Social relationships are often mapped into directed or undirected graphs, sometimes called
acquaintance graphs or simply social connection graphs. The nodes in a social graph correspond to
the users or actors and the graph edges or links refer to the ties or relationships among the nodes.
The graphs can be complex and hierarchically structured to reflect relationships at all levels. There
can be many kinds of ties between the nodes. Social networks operate from the family level up to
national and global levels. There are pros and cons of social networks. Most free societies welcome
social networks. For political or religious reasons, some countries block the use of social networks
to prevent possible abuses.
9.5.2.1 Social Network Graph Properties
Social networks play a critical role in problem solving, running an organization, and the degree to
which individuals succeed in achieving their goals. A social network is simply a map of all of the
relevant ties between all the actor nodes. The network can also be used to measure social capital—
the value that an individual gets from the social network. These concepts are often displayed in a
social network graph. Figure 9.24 shows an example social network graph. The black dots are the
nodes (users) and the lines link the nodes under specified relationships.
9.5.2.2 Node Degree, Reach, Path Length, and Betweenness
The node degree is the number of ties of a node to other actors in the graph. The reach is defined
as the degree any member of a network can reach other members of the network. Path length mea-
sures the distance between pairs of nodes in the network. Average path length is the average of
these distances between all pairs of nodes. Betweenness reveals the extent to which a node lies
between other nodes in the network. The measure reflects the number of people with whom a per-
son is connecting indirectly through his direct links.
B A
C
D
FIGURE9.24
Agraphrepresentationofanexamplesocialnetwork.


===== page 625 =====
602 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.5.2.3 Closeness and Cohesion
Closeness is the degree to which an individual is near all other individuals in a network (directly or
indirectly). It reflects the ability to access information through network members. Thus, closeness is
the inverse of the sum of the shortest distances between each individual and every other person in the
network. Cohesion is the degree to which actors are connected directly to one another by cohesive
bonds. Groups are identified as “cliques” if every individual is directly tied to every other individual.
9.5.2.4 Social Circles or Clusters
This refers to some structured groups. If there is less stringency of direct contact or as structurally
cohesive blocks, a social circle can be created either loosely or tightly, depending on the stringency
rules applied. Those nodes inside the circle of Figure 9.24 form an isolated cluster. Clustering co-
efficient is the likelihood that two associates of a node are associates themselves.
9.5.2.5 Centralized versus Decentralized Networks
Centrality gives a rough indication of the social power of a node based on how well it “connects”
the network. Betweenness, closeness, and degree are all measures of centrality. Centralized networks
have links dispersed around one or a few nodes, while a decentralized network is one in which
there is little variation between the number of links each node possesses.
9.5.2.6 Bridge and Local Bridge
An edge is a bridge if deleting it would cause its endpoints to lie in different clusters or compo-
nents of a graph. For example, the edge between nodes C and D in Figure 9.24 is a bridge. The
endpoints of a local bridge share no common neighbors. A local bridge is contained in a cycle.
9.5.2.7 Prestige and Radiality
In a social graph, prestige describes a node’s centrality. Degree prestige, proximity prestige, and
status prestige are all measures of prestige. Radiality is the degree to which a network reaches out
and provides novel information and influence.
9.5.2.8 Structural Cohesion, Equivalence, and Holes
Structural cohesion is the minimum number of members who, if removed from a group, would dis-
connect the group. Structural equivalence refers to the extent to which nodes have a common set of
linkages to other nodes. These nodes do not have any ties to one another. A structural hole can be
filled by connecting one or more links to reach other nodes. This is related to social capital: By
linking two disconnected people, you can control their communication.
Example 9.12 Some Graph Representations of Sample Social Networks
Figure 9.25 shows four sample social networks. In part (a), the graph corresponds to a 436-node network
of e-mail exchanges at a corporate research laboratory. However, social network data spans many orders
of magnitude. For example, for a large university, the e-mail exchange network could end up with a
43,553-node network over a two-year period. Counting all instant messages over one month at MSN, one
may end up with 240 million connections. The analysis of large-scale social networks may enable us to
observe global behavior. In Part (b), we show the network of book recommendations. Jon Klienberg [44]


===== page 626 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 603
(a) Cooperate e-mail exchanges (courtesy of
L. Adamic and E. Adar, 2005)
(b) Book recommendation (courtesy of J. Leskovec,
L. Adamic and B. Huberman 2006)
FIGURE9.25
Graphrepresentationsoftwosocialnetworks.
has identified many epidemic graphs on news, opinions, political mobilization, etc. Models for cascading
behavioris a populartopic insocialnetworks.
9.5.3 Communities and Applications of Social Networks
Niche communities become increasingly important and are highly valuable, particularly for special
interest magazines, radio stations, sports web sites, sports clubs, health web portals, private clinics
which are specialized in certain health topics, industry associations, and companies that are looking
for new ways to interact with their customers or employees. This section discusses a few social
network communities.


===== page 627 =====
604 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.5.3.1 Communities in Social Networks
Very large-scale social networks result in very large-scale graphs with millions or hundreds of
millions of user nodes. Such large graphs can often be partitioned into many smaller subgraphs, cor-
responding to various actor communities. Six specialized social network communities are pointing
to different sectors of our society. This list only offers a few examples. One can form many other
communities from online social networking.
(cid:129) Industry communities Special industrial workers or professionals are often connected with one
another. They share knowledge and work experience.
(cid:129) Artist communities These network communities are specifically composed to enable artists,
musicians, or celebrities to personalize and intensify their contact with their existing fans as well
as enabling contact among community members.
(cid:129) Sport communities These are network communities for special interests and activities of
athletes and sport fans. People can find friends, celebrate their passion, and exchange ideas.
(cid:129) Health communities These are dedicated to the needs of actors concerned about health issues.
(cid:129) Congresses and event communities These are customized to support all preparations necessary
for congresses and events, as well as all processes thereafter.
(cid:129) Alumni communities After completing their studies, alumni can find fellow students, stay in
touch, and foster friendships.
Example 9.13 Citation Graph to Partition Research Communities
Ina2010talkatUSC,JohnHopcroft[40]identifiedtheuseoflarge-scalegraphtheorytoanalyzetheimpactof
onlinesocialnetworking.Heidentifiedthemergingofcomputingandcommunicationsinaubiquitousfashion
andtheexplosivegrowthofdigitaldatafromnetworkeddevicesandsensors.Accordingly,Internetsearch
enginesarechanging.Internetqueriesshouldbeabletoaddresshigh-levelquestionssuchas“whereIshouldI
gotocollege?”inafaster,morepersonalized,andmoreintelligentway.Heusedanexample(inFigure9.26)to
illustratethetrackingoftheflowofideasinscientificliteratureandevolutionofcommunitiesinsocialnetworks.
Three distinct categories of papers
(a) Graph of referenced papers (b) Graph of referenced papers cleaned up
FIGURE 9.26
Partitioninginpapercitationgraphtoidentifyresearchcommunities.
(CourtesyofYookyungJo,CornellUniversity)


===== page 628 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 605
Figure 9.26(a) shows a citation graph of referenced papers by authors working in related areas. The
dots represent individual papers. The edges link the papers if they reference each either one way or
mutually. Through some cleaning process, certain papers are merged due to self-citation or other con-
cerns. The reduced citation graph in Figure 9.26(b) is obtained with referenced papers cleaned up. One
can partition the cleaned graph into three categories of papers that are related to a similar approach or
based onthe samesolutionmodel.
In tracking communities in social networks, many authors have revealed interesting statistical
properties of community structure in large social and information networks. Jure Leskovec, et al.
[49] have indicated that the best communities are size 100−150. This data is drawn from the
study of 70 large, sparse, real-world social networks. Such small communities are formed with
special relationships such as family and friends, classmates, and work colleagues. These commu-
nities may overlap in many ways. The peers could be connected inside or outside the community
boundary. He has revealed the fact that there are more connections outside than inside for most
people, which is intuitively valid based on the common experiences of many of us. Other inter-
esting observations include the existence of a core in social networks. Often, the core can be
either unique or shared.
9.5.3.2 Social Network Application Domains
There are an infinite number of applications for social networks. In Table 9.11, we classify those
applications into five specific domains. Examples and their web sites are listed for our readers to
explore. The use of social network services in an enterprise context presents the potential of having
a major impact on the world of business and work. Social networks connect people at a low cost;
this can be beneficial for entrepreneurs and small businesses looking to expand their contact bases.
Table 9.11 Applications ofExisting SocialNetworks
Domains ExamplesandWebSites
Business LinkedInconnectsprofessionals(www.linkedin.com)andHubCultureconnects
entrepreneurs(www.hubculture.com).
Education TheNationalSchoolBoardsAssociationandeducationtopicscanberesearched
online(www.ning.com).
Government TheU.S.CentersforDiseaseControlandPreventiondemonstratedtheimportance
ofvaccinationsonwww.whyville.net,apopularchildren’ssite.TheNationalOceanic
andAtmosphericAdministrationhasavirtualislandonhttp://secondlife.com,where
peoplecanexploreundergroundcavesorexploretheeffectsofglobalwarming.
Medicalandhealth www.patientslikeme.comoffersitsmembersthechancetoconnectwithothers
care dealingwithsimilarissuesandresearchpatientdatarelatedtotheircondition.
www.sobercircle.com,whichhasjoinedforceswithwww.onerecovery.com,gives
peopleinrecoverytheabilitytocommunicatewithoneanotherandstrengthen
theirrecovery.
Onlinedating OnlinesocialnetworkingsitessuchasFacebook,SecondLife,andMySpaceare
quicklybecomingthenewwaytofinddatesonline.


===== page 629 =====
606 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
These networks often act as a customer relationship management tool for companies selling pro-
ducts and services. Companies can also use social networks to advertize. With global operations,
social networks can make it easier to promote business around the world.
One example of social networking being used for business purposes is LinkedIn.com, which
aims to interconnect professionals. Another is the use of physical spaces available to members of a
social network. Some hub culture extends invitations only to entrepreneurs and other business suc-
cessors to join a social network. Having a physical presence allows members to network in the real
as well as virtual worlds, adding extra business value. Applications for social networking sites have
extended to businesses, and brands are creating their own sector known as brand networking, which
is based on the idea that a brand can build its consumer relationship by connecting consumers to
the brand image on a platform.
9.5.3.3 LinkedIn for Professional Networking
Social networks for professional connections include LinkedIn.com, Xing.com, and Ecademy.com.
LinkedIn is a business-oriented social networking site. LinkedIn’s main focus is to manage and
build online and/or offline professional networks. LinkedIn has more than 80 million members in
more than 200 countries. A new member joins LinkedIn approximately every second, and about
half of the members are outside the United States. Executives from all Fortune 500 companies are
LinkedIn members. This site allows registered users to maintain a list of contact details of people
they know and trust in business. Users can invite anyone to become a member.
9.5.3.4 Educational Applications
The National School Boards Association reports that almost 60 percent of students who use social
networking talk about education topics online and, surprisingly, more than 50 percent talk specifi-
cally about schoolwork. Yet the vast majority of school districts have stringent rules against nearly
all forms of social networking during the school day—even though students and parents report few
problem behavior online. Social networks focused on supporting relationships between teachers and
between teachers and their students are now used for learning, educator professional development,
and content sharing. Ning for teachers, Learn Central, [60] TeachStreet, and other sites are being
built to foster relationships that include educational blogs, e-portfolios, formal and ad hoc commu-
nities, as well as communication such as chats, discussion threads, and synchronous forums.
9.5.3.5 Government Applications
Social networking tools serve as a quick and easy way for the government to get the opinion of the
public and to keep the public updated on their activity. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention demonstrated the importance of vaccinations on the popular children’s site Whyville and
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has a virtual island on Second Life where
people can explore underground caves or explore the effects of global warming. Similarly, NASA
has taken advantage of a few social networking tools, including Twitter and Flickr. They use these
tools to promote a vigorous and sustainable path to achieving its boldest aspirations in space.
9.5.3.6 Health Care and Medical Applications
Social networks are beginning to be adopted by health care professionals as a means to manage
institutional knowledge, disseminate P2P knowledge, and highlight individual physicians and


===== page 630 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 607
institutions. The advantage of using a dedicated medical social networking site is that all the
members are screened against the state licensing board list of practitioners. The role of social
networks is especially of interest to pharmaceutical companies who spend approximately 32 percent
of their marketing dollars to influence the opinion leaders of social networks.
Anewtrendisemergingwithsocialnetworkscreatedtohelpmemberswith variousphysicaland
mentalailments.Forpeoplesuffering fromlife-alteringdiseases,PatientsLikeMeoffersitsmembers
thechancetoconnectwithothersdealingwithsimilarissuesandresearchpatientdatarelatedtotheir
condition. For alcoholics and addicts, SoberCircle gives people in recovery the ability to communi-
cate with one another and strengthen their recovery through the encouragement of others who can
relatetotheirsituation.DailyStrengthisalsoawebsitethatofferssupportgroupsforawidearrayof
topicsandconditions,includingthesupporttopicsofferedbyPatientsLikeMeandSoberCircle.Spark-
Peopleofferscommunityandsocialnetworkingtoolsforpeersupportduringweightloss.
9.5.3.7 Dating Services
Manysocialnetworksprovideanonlineenvironmentforpeopletocommunicateandexchangeperso-
nalinformationfordating purposes.Intentionscanvaryfromlookingforaone-timedateto looking
for a short-term or long-term relationship. Most of these dating services require users to give out
some personal information such as age, gender, location, interests, and perhaps a picture. Releasing
personal information is often discouraged for safety reasons. This allows other users to search or be
searched, but at the same time people can maintain a degree of anonymity. Online dating sites are
similartosocialnetworksinthesensethatuserscreateprofilestomeetandcommunicatewithothers.
Online dating sites usually require a fee, where social networks are free. This difference is one
of the reasons the online dating industry is seeing a massive decrease in revenue due to many users
opting to use free social networking services. Many popular online dating services such as Match.
com, Yahoo! Personals, and eHarmony.com are seeing a decrease in users, where social networks
such as MySpace and Facebook are experiencing an increase in users. The number of Internet users
in the U.S. that visit online dating sites has fallen from a peak of 21 percent in 2003 to 10 percent
in 2006. In other words, social networks are gradually taking over most of the dating services.
9.5.3.8 Privacy Breach in Social Networks
Many people are reluctant to join online social networks for worry about privacy breaches. Still,
the growth of social network members is rather impressive, regardless of the fact of serious abuses
reported every day. For example, many people charge that MyPlace has made public what should
be private matters. As observed by Jon Klienberg, the software we use has a trace of our activ-
ities. Anonymization may not be totally effective in protecting sensitive data in massive social
networks. The following example explains the scenario. Active attacks can easily compromise
privacy by creating new accounts in practice. We need better algorithmic ideas to cope with this
problem.
Example 9.14 Attacking an Anonymized Social Network (Jon Klienberg [44])
Consider the attack scenario: By accident, an organization released an anonymized communication graph
on 100 million users, as shown in Figure 9.27(a). An attacker chooses a small set of user accounts to dig
into their private relations or activities, as shown in Figure 9.27(b). Before the data set is released, the


===== page 631 =====
608 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
100M nodes 100M nodes 100M nodes
(a) A huge network (b) Three users targeted (c) Attack accounts created
100M+12 nodes 100M+12 nodes 100M+12 nodes
(d) Attack accounts embedded (e) Hidden subgraph H found (f) Finding the target nodes
FIGURE 9.27
Attacktrackinginananonymizedsocialnetwork.
(CourtesyofJonKleinberg[44])
attacker may create a small set of new accounts with links among them to form a subgraph H attached to
the targeted accounts, as shown in Figure 9.27(c). When the data set is released, the organization wants
to find H. Thisisa computationally hardproblem, asshownin Figure9.27(d).
In fact, Kleinberg indicated that the small random graph H will likely be unique and efficiently findable
as shown in Figure 9.27(e), because each edge has a probability of 0.5 percent to be present on a
random graph. Once H is found, one can find the targeted nodes by following the edges from H in
Figure 9.27(f). Onecan breachprivacy withO ((logn)1/2) new nodes.The companyshould avoid releasing
an anonymized social network. Privacy-preserving mechanisms are still very much in demand to protect
users from suchattacks.
9.5.4 Facebook: The World’s Largest Social Network
Facebook was launched by Mark Zuckerberg in 2004. Initially, Facebook was only available to
Harvard University students. Today, anybody older than 13 years of age and with a valid e-mail
address can register on Facebook. In March 2011, it was reported that Facebook had 600 million
active users and a monthly growth rate of 3.57 percent [88], making Facebook the world’s largest
social network. Figure 9.28 shows various services provided.
The largest sector of applications is to enhance communications among the users. Social compari-
son is welcome by job seekers. Playing social games is popular among the youngsters and retirees.
Social selection, sending gifts, and profile enhancement facilitate more frequent social contacts. The
tell-me-about-me, media sharing, playing, naming, dating, and social events are more traditional areas.
[image text] IOOM+12 nodes


===== page 632 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 609
Community
Social good
Misc Fortunes
Events
Naming
Dating
Play with digital pet
Enhanced
communication Play game
Media sharing
Tell me about me
Send gift
Social comparison
Profile
enhancement
Play social game
Social selection
FIGURE9.28
Distributionof28.4millionFacebookapplications,averagedfortheweekendingNovember8,2007.
(Source:TheFacebookApplicationEcosystem:WhySomeThrive-andMostDon’tAnO’ReillyRadarReportby
ShellyD.Farnham,Ph.DCopyright©2008WaggleLabsAllrightsreserved.UsedwithPermission)
This distribution varies with time. Once the privacy and security issues are resolved for social net-
works, the number of registered users will grow even more in the future.
9.5.4.1 Functionality of Facebook
Facebook includes six essential items, as shown in Table 9.12. Facebook needs to improve in terms
of privacy. Compared with Twitter, Facebook has stricter access control, and thus is more secure to
use. However, one must be aware that all personal data is stored on the provider’s servers, including
education and career information as well as personal messages and social links. Security and trust
are the major concerns that prevent users from joining or staying active on Facebook. Users are
willing to share more information because they like to communicate with their real-life friends.
Without registration constraints, maintaining trust among Facebook users is a serious problem.
Facebookusesanetworkwithauthenticationtoauthenticateusers.Anetworkisasubsetoftheusers
onFacebookwithcertainauthentications.Forexample,tojoinauniversitynetwork,onemayhaveto
registerwithauniversitye-mailaddress,orfollowsomeotherauthenticationmethodapprovedbythe
networkadministrator.Thefriendsofthisusercouldidentifytheuserbyhisprofileinthenetwork.
9.5.4.2 Architecture of the Facebook Platform
With 600 million active users, you can imagine how many personal profiles and multimedia infor-
mation items are shared by various social groups on Facebook. You can also imagine how much
user traffic is flowing into the Facebook web site (www.facebook.com). The Facebook platform is


===== page 633 =====
610 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Table 9.12 Functionality of FacebookFeatures
Function Implementation
Profilepage Combinedprofile:profilepicture,bioinformation,friendslist,user’sactivitylog,
publicmessageboard,othercomponentsselectivelydisplayed
Socialgraph Accessthroughuser’sfriendslistonprofilepages,withaccesscontrol
traversal
Communication Internale-mail-likemessage:sendandreceiveprivatemessagesamongfriends;
tools instantmessaging:accessedonthewebpage,orthroughthird-partyclient;public
messageboard:“Wall,”withaccesscontrol;updatestatus:ashortmessage,like
micro-blogging,withaccesscontrol
Sharedinformation Photoalbum:built-in,withaccesscontrol;links:postlinkstooutsideURL,will
appearontheactivitylog;videos:embeddedoutsidevideosonprofilepage
Accesscontrol Everyitemontheprofilepagecanbesettooneoffouraccesscontrollevels:only
me,onlyfriends,friendsoffriends,oreveryone
SpecialAPIs Games,calendars,mobileclients
Your
Pages Sites Networks
network
Facebook
Ringside social application server
integration
Community
Social engine
Facebook API engine
Open social ID, security,
integration Ringside API rendering, Control panel
FB integration, etc.
Extensible API
Social graph Open DSL (fbml,*) System apps
- Profiles
- Tags
- Relationships
Apps Apps Apps
FIGURE 9.29
TheFacebookarchitecturebuiltwithsocialengineserversandApplicationProgrammingInterfaces(APIs).
(CourtesyofFacebook,Inc.2010)
essentially a huge data center with a very large storage capacity, intelligent file systems, and search-
ing capabilities. Figure 9.29 illustrates the structure of the Facebook platform.
The platform is formed with a huge cluster of servers. These machines are called ringside social
application servers. The social engine is the core of the server, which performs the functions of
identification, security, rendering, and Facebook integration. Three specific APIs are installed to


===== page 634 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 611
facilitate user access. A community engine provides networking services to users. Requests are
shown as pages, sites, and networks entering the Facebook server from the top. The social engine
executes all sorts of user applications. Open DSL is used to support application execution.
9.5.4.3 Some New Facebook Applications
Successful Facebook applications help users to achieve such social goals as improved communica-
tion, learning about themselves relative to others, finding people with similar interests, improving
self-presentation, engaging in social play, and engaging in social exchanges via gifts and media.
Facebook has greater appeal in the private and personal domain, as opposed to professional
connections.
In late 2010, Mark Zukerberg announced a new form of messaging over the Internet that could
trigger a revolutionary change in Internet communication among trusted friends and social circles.
He feels that the traditional e-mail for epistolary interpersonal communication is outmoded. He pro-
poses a social inbox concept where users can readily access messages from friends and then sort
them based on personal preference. This is something between instant messaging and Twitter. The
more we text or Twitter or make friends through social networking, the less likely we want to
express ourselves in complex ways. In other words, simplicity and convenience will dominate the
future demands of online social networking.
9.5.5 Twitter for Microblogging, News, and Alert Services
Twitter is a microblogging service launched in 2006 by Jack Dorsey, Biz Stone, and Evan Wil-
liams. Each message sent through Twitter can be no more than 140 characters in length. This idea
originated from Short Message Service (SMS) technology over mobile devices such as smartphones.
A user can use SMS to send a message to Twitter, and the message will be forwarded to many
other Twitter users that are related to the sender. Twitter was built to share thoughts or ideas
instantly. But gradually major TV networks and newspapers also started to use Twitter to provide
updated news to the public. Twitter has become a media platform in which ordinary users can be in
the front line of breaking news.
9.5.5.1 Twitter Architecture and Access Control
There are three major components in the Twitter system: crawler, indexer, and searcher. Each com-
ponent differs in the functions it performs. They are used together through balanced coordination to
form a complete system. Figure 9.30 shows the Twitter access architecture in eight steps. Twitter.
com started as a status sharing site that people accessed via their mobile phones. Twitter soon
became a Web 2.0 microblogging site for information sharing and news reporting. As of late 2010,
Twitter had 175 million users. Furthermore, HubSpot reported that Twitter was enjoying an aston-
ishing 18,000 percent growth rate.
9.5.5.2 Twitter Development Trends
Twitter’ssuccesscan beattributedto two main factors: elegance in design, and simplicity in adding
third-party improvements. Twitter calls microblog posts from users tweets. The elegance is due to
the character limit in tweet messages. Each tweet has a 140-character limit which is inherited from
text messaging. A comparison between blogging and microblogging gives us a good understanding


===== page 635 =====
612 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
behind Twitter’s popularity. While blogging requires good writing skills and lots of content to fill
pages,Twitterrestrictspoststo140characters,whichencouragesmanypeopletopost.
Simplicity is provided with an HTTP-based open source API and sharing posts with third-party
applications. Twitter’s API consists of two different parts: a Search API and a REST API. The
REST API enables Twitter developers to access core Twitter data. This data includes tweets, time-
lines, and user data. The Search API enables developers to query the tweets. It also provides infor-
mation about trending topics. The usage of both APIs is subject to rate limiting. Twitter may add
these applications to its white list and remove request limitations. The ease and flexible usage of
Twitter APIs have encouraged many developers to write Twitter applications.
9.5.5.3 Functionalities of Twitter
TwitterprovidessixessentialfunctionsinTable9.13,twoofwhichareaccesscontrolandAPIapplica-
tions.SimplicityandopennessarethekeystoTwitter’spopularity.ThecoreserviceofTwitterisvery
User 1. The crawler sends a request to the Twitter APL.
Stored 2. The Twitter API responds with the Twitter data.
Twitter files 3. The crawler stores the data into files.
API 3 7
1, 2 4 4. The indexer reads the stored files as input.
6, 9
5. The indexer stores the data in a database as output.
Crawler Indexer Searcher
6. Users send a search query to the searcher.
5
8 7. The searcher reads the data from the database and
calculates a rank.
Database
8. The searcher reads associated raw tweets.
FIGURE 9.30
Twitterarchitectureandaccessprotocolsequence.
(CourtesyofHaoSong,USC2009)
Table 9.13 Functionsof Twitterand TheirImplementations
Function Implementation
Profilepage Simpleprofile:profilepicture,bioinformation,followerslist,followinglist,user’smessage
timeline
Socialgraph Accessthroughthefollowingandfollower’slistsonusers’profilepages,withoutaccess
traversal control
Communication Internale-mail:sendprivatedirectmessagestofollowers;instantmessaging:notreally
tools instant,canbeimplementedbydirectmessages;publicmessageboard:message
timeline,withaccesscontrol
Share Photoalbum:thirdparty,likeTwitpic,butnocombinedaccesscontrol;links:postlinks
information tooutsideURL,willappearasamessageontimeline
Accesscontrol Messagetimelineonprofilepagecanbesetaccesscontrolintwolevels:privateor
public
APIapplications Mobileclients,PCclients,photosharing,automaticnewsfeed


===== page 636 =====
9.5 Online Social and Professional Networking 613
simple: just sending messages to a group of people. All other uses are contributed by third-party
developers.TwitterprovidesaveryopenAPI,sothird-partydeveloperscancreatepowerfulclientsor
specialapplicationsforTwitter.TheconnectionsonTwitterarenotofflinesocialrelationships.Users
can follow someone they do not know in real life. Not everyone on Twitter is using his real name,
andevenwhenrealnamesareused,thereisnoeffectivewaytoidentifyusers.Eversincelaunchedin
2009,Twitterhasprovideda verified-accountserviceforcelebritiesandofficialagencies. However,
therevealingofpersonalinformationonTwitterstillposesaprivacyproblem.
Twitter cannot be regarded as a fully trusted network or a reliable acquaintance basis. Consider
two types of accounts: public and protected accounts. Anyone can see updates at public accounts.
For protected accounts, only the users that have been approved can see their updates. In order to
prevent identity confusion, Twitter selects accounts from celebrities to provide verification. The ver-
ified notice is posted on verified accounts. Twitter provides two new features, Twitter Lists and
Location, to support this verification process. Twitter Lists allow users to create a list of Twitter
accounts. The list can help users organize the people they follow. The lists can also support loca-
tion-based services. Location-sensitive applications like those aided by GPS devices can be greatly
simplified with Twitter services.
9.5.5.4 Twitter Applications
Many interesting Twitter applications exist. For instance, one can use the public to help determine
business or fashion trends and identify popular music and movies. Twitter was even used during
the 2008 presidential campaign in the United States to attract young voters to spread then-candidate
Barack Obama’s “Change” message. Twitter also gives users the option to send their current loca-
tions along with their tweets. Twitter provides the Twitter API for developers to request Twitter
data. The API supports REST calls.
Two types of APIs are supported: normal APIs and streaming APIs. Streaming APIs are for
real-time access to the public statuses over a persistent connection. @anywhere offers a service that
developers use to integrate external parties with Twitter. Lastly, Twitter also collects information
about programming libraries that help create Twitter-based applications. Two specific Twitter appli-
cations are described in the following list:
(cid:129) Fast News Release Twitter is becoming the fastest way to spread breaking news. Massive user
collaboration has given Twitter a clear edge over most news centers. Some news centers have
set up Twitter accounts to encourage users to spread breaking news. For example, CNN
maintains 45 official Twitter accounts with more than 5 million followers. During the election
periods in various countries, Twitter attracted more attention than news centers. Some
governments even warned Twitter.com not to enter maintenance cutoffs in order to receive
continuous information flow. Information to Twitter may consist of photos, links, and videos
that arrive much faster than via conventional news media.
(cid:129) Alert Systems Twitter provides a system that can connect residents of a city with virtually no cost.
It also increases the capabilities of an alert system by inputting more user-generated data. Some
cities have already opted for Twitter to alert their residents. The Virginia Tech killings in 2007
highlighted the security issues on university campuses. To integrate the e2Campus emergency
notification network with popular social networks, Pacific University of Forest Grove, Oregon,
implemented a Twitter-based alert system for its students, and the trend is likely to grow.


===== page 637 =====
614 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.6 BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES AND HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Wide coverage of the principles and paradigms of cloud computing are provided in [8]. Cloud
design and security issues are covered in [70]. Buyya, et al. [9] have introduced a market-oriented
cloud computing framework. Basic cloud research can be found in [1,34,59–62,69–71,94]. Cloud
computing applications are studied in [28,33,48,56,59,61,63,67,68,93]. Science and research clouds
are studied in [13,15,19–23,30,35–39,52,64,76,79]. Trust models for clouds are proposed in
[12,24,42]. Cloud support for ubiquitous computing and mobile applications can be found in
[6,8,16,74]. Public clouds are covered in [6,8,31,34,48,65] and private clouds in [11,72]. Cloud mash-
ups are studied in [18,88]. Google’s experiences on MapReduce and BigTable are reported in [14].
BryantintroducedtheDISCparadigmin[5].TheSGICyclonewasreportedin[3].Datacoloring
andcloudwatermarkingarestudiedin[42].Grid andcloudperformance,simulation,andbenchmark
studiescanbefoundin[9,25,33,50,51,67,68,75,89,90,93].Forsciencecloudsandapplications,read-
ers are referred to FutureGrid [30], Grid’5000 [35], Magellan [56], Open Circus and Open Cloud
Testbed [64], Science Clouds [76], Sky Computing [43], and Venus-C [79]. Amazon benchmarking
results are reported in [31,32,75,80]. Cloud security is treated in [12,42,54,55,57,70,83]. Operating
systemsupportforcloudcomputingcanbefoundin[60,62,72].Parallelbenchmarksandperformance
evaluationofclusters,MPPs,anddistributedsystemscanbefoundinHwangandXu[41].
The Internet of Things was treated in [45,73,78]. RFID is treated in [2,81,91,92]. Material on
sensors and ZigBee technologies can be found in [73] and GPS in [78]. Supply chain management
is treated in [91]. The CPS material is based on [17,47,85]. Online social networks are introduced
in [4,7,53,86]. Social network analysis is given in [10,29,40,42,46,49,53,58,82,84]. Facebook is
reported in [23,26,27]. Twitter is reported in [16,42,66,77]. P2P technology for trust management
and social networking can be found in [12,24,43,51,54]. Kleinberg analyzed large-scale social
networks in [44]. Reed assessed clouds, many cores, and clusters in [69].
Acknowledgements
KaiHwangofUSCistheprimaryauthorofthischapter.HewasassistedbyZhongyuanQin,Kaikun
Dong, Vikram Dixit, and Hao Song of the University of Southern California. Judy Qiu of Indiana
UniversityhascontributedSections9.2.1and9.2.5.
References
[1] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griffith, et al., Above theClouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing, Tech-
nicalReport No.UCB/EECS-2009-28, University of California at Berkley, 10February 2009.
[2] C. Bardaki, P. Kourouthanassis, RFID-integrated retail supply chain services: Lessons learnt from the
SMART project, in: Proceedings of the Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems (MCIS 2009),
Athens, Greece.
[3] M.Barrenechea, SGI CEO.HPC Cloud-Cyclone.www.sgi.com/cyclone, 2010.
[4] J. Bishop, Understanding and Facilitating the Development of Social Networks in Online Dating Commu-
nities: A Case Study and Model. www.jonathanbishop.com/Library/Documents/EN/docSNCEDS_Ch15
.pdf, 2008.


===== page 638 =====
References 615
[5] R. Bryant, Data Intensive Supercomputing: The Case for DISC, Technical Report, CMU CS-07-128,
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~bryant,2007.
[6] J. Brodkin, Ten Cloud Computing Companies to Watch. Network World. www.cio.com/article/print/
492885,2010.
[7] S. Buchegger, A. Datta, A case for P2P infrastructure for social networks: Opportunities, challenges,
in: Sixth InternationalConference onWireless on-Demand Network SystemsandServices (WONS2009).
[8] R. Buyya, J. Broberg, A. Goscinski (Eds.), Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms, Wiley Press,
New York,2011.
[9] R.Buyya,C.Yeo,S.Venugopal,Market-oriented cloud computing: Vision,hype, and reality for delivering
IT services as computingutilities,in:10thIEEEInternationalConferenceonHighPerformanceComputing
andCommunications,September2008.
[10] P. Carrington, et al., (Eds.), ModelsandMethods in Social Network Analysis, CambridgeUniversity Press,
2005.
[11] CERN VMdownload. http://rbuilder.cern.ch/project/cernvm/build?id=81,2010.
[12] K.Chen,K.Hwang,G.Chen,Heuristicdiscoveryofrole-basedtrustchainsinP2Pnetworks,IEEETrans.
Parallel Distrib. Syst.(2009)83–96.
[13] Condor CloudComputing.www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/description.html, 2010.
[14] J. Dean, Handling Large Datasets at Google: Current Systems and Future Directions, Invited Talk at HSF
Panel. http://labs.google.com/people/jeff,2008.
[15] E. Deelman, G. Singh, M. Livny, B. Berriman, J. Good, The cost of doing science on the cloud: The
Montage example, in: Proc. of ACM/IEEE Conf. on Supercomputing, IEEE Press, Austin, TX, 2008,
pp. 1–12.
[16] M. Demirbas, M.A. Bayir, C.G. Akcora, Y.S. Yilmaz, H. Ferhatosmanoglu, Crowd-sourced sensing and
collaboration using Twitter, in: IEEE International Symposium on World of Wireless Mobile and Multi-
media Networks (WoWMoM), Montreal, 14–17June2010,pp. 1–9.
[17] Distributed Robotics Garden, MIT. http://people.csail.mit.edu/nikolaus/drg/, 2010.
[18] V.Dixit,CloudMashup:AgilityandScalability,EE657FinalProjectReport,Univ.ofS.Calif.,May2010.
[19] J. Ekanayake, X. Qiu, T. Gunarathne, S. Beason, G. Fox, High performance parallel computing with
clouds and cloud technologies, in: Cloud Computing and Software Services: Theory and Techniques,
CRC Press(Taylor andFrancis), 2010,p. 30.
[20] J. Ekanayake, A.S. Balkir, T. Gunarathne, et al., DryadLINQ for scientific analyses, in: Fifth IEEE Inter-
national Conference oneScience,Oxford, England,2009.
[21] J. Ekanayake, H. Li, B. Zhang, et al., Twister: A runtime for iterative MapReduce, in: Proceedings of the
First Int’l WorkshoponMapReduce andItsApplications, ACM HPDC,20–25June2010, Chicago.
[22] J. Ekanayake, T. Gunarathne, J. Qiu, Cloud technologies for bioinformatics applications, in: IEEE Trans-
actions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, accepted to appear, http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/
publications/BioCloud_TPDS_Journal_Jan4_2010.pdf, 2011.
[23] S. Farnham, TheFacebook Application Ecosystem, An O’Reilly Radar Report, 2008.
[24] Q. Feng, K. Hwang, Y. Dai, Rainbow Product Ranking for Upgrading e-Commerce, IEEE Internet Com-
put. 13(5) (2009)72–80.
[25] D.G. Feitelson, Workload Modeling for Computer Systems Performance Evaluation, Draft Version 0.7,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem,2006.
[26] P. Fong, M. Anwar, Z. Zhao, A privacy preservation model for Facebook-style social network systems,
in: European Symposium on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS 2009), 21–23 September 2009.
[27] F. Fovet, Impact of the use of Facebook amongst students of high school age with social, emotional and
behavioural difficulties (SEBD),in: IEEE39th Frontiers inEducation Conference, 2009.
[28] G. Fox, S. Bae, J. Ekanayake, X. Qiu, H. Yuan, Parallel data mining from multicore to cloudy grids,
in: High Speed and Large Scale Scientific Computing, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2009.


===== page 639 =====
616 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
[29] L.Freeman, TheDevelopment of Social Network Analysis, Empirical Press,Vancouver, 2006.
[30] FutureGrid Cyberinfrastructure to allow testing of innovative systems and applications, Home page. www
.futuregrid.org,(accessed 13.11.10).
[31] S.L. Garfinkel, An evaluation of Amazon’s grid computing services: EC2, S3 and SQS, in: Center for
Research onComputation andSociety, Harvard University, Technical Report,2007.
[32] S.Garfinkel, Commodity grid computing with Amazon’sS3 andEC2,Login32(1) (2007)7–13.
[33] L. Gong, S.H. Sun, E.F. Watson, Performance modeling and prediction of non-dedicated network comput-
ing,IEEETrans. Computers 51(9) (2002)1041–1055.
[34] A. Greenberg, J. Hamilton, D.A. Maltz, P. Patel, The cost of a cloud: Research problems in data center
networks, in: SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 68–73, 2008, http://doi
.acm.org/10.1145/1496091.1496103.
[35] Grid’5000 and ALADDIN-G5K: An infrastructure distributed in 9 sites around France, for research in
large-scale parallel and distributed systems. https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/Grid5000:Home,
(accessed20.11.10).
[36] R. Grossman, Y. Gu, M. Sabala, et al., The open cloud testbed: Supporting open source cloud computing
systems based on large scale high performance, in: A. Doulamis, et al., (Eds.), DynamicNetwork Services,
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,pp. 89–97.
[37] R. Grossman, Y. Gu, J. Mambretti, et al., An overview of the open science data cloud, in: Proc. of the
19thACM Int’l Symp.onHighPerformance Distributed Computing, Chicago, 2010,pp. 377–384.
[38] T. Gunarathne, T.L. Wu, J. Qiu, G. Fox, Cloud Computing Paradigms for Pleasingly Parallel Biomedical
Applications, in: Proceedings of the Emerging Computational Methods for the Life Sciences Workshop of
ACMHPDC 2010Conference, Chicago, 20–25June2010.
[39] C. Hoffa, et al., On the use of cloud computing for scientific workflows, in: IEEE Fourth International
Conference oneScience,December 2008.
[40] J.Hopcroft,Computersciencetheorytosupportresearchintheinformationage,in:DistinguishedLecture,
University of SouthernCalifornia, 6 April 2010.
[41] K. Hwang, Z. Xu, Scalable Parallel Computing: Technology, Architecture and Programmability, McGraw-
HillBook Co.,NewYork,1998.
[42] K. Hwang, D. Li, Trusted cloud computing with secure resources and data coloring, IEEE Internet Com-
put.(September)(2010) 14–22.
[43] K. Keahey, M. Tsugawa, A. Matsunaga, J. Fortes, Sky computing, IEEE Internet Comput. 13 (2009)
43–51, doi:http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MIC.2009.94; www.nimbusproject.org/files/Sky_
Computing.pdf.
[44] J.Kleinberg, Algorithmic Perspectives onLarge-Scale Social Network Data, Cornell University, 2008.
[45] G. Kortuem, F. Kawsar, D. Fitton, V. Sundramoorthy, Smart objects as building blocks for the Internet of
things, IEEEInternet Comput. 14(1) (2010)44–51.
[46] R. Kumar, J. Novak, A. Tomkins, Structure and evolution of online social networks, in: The 12th ACM
SIGKDDInternational Conference onKnowledge DiscoveryandData Mining,August2006.
[47] E.A. Lee, Cyber physical systems: Design challenges, in: 11th IEEE International Symposium on Object
OrientedReal-Time Distributed Computing, 5–7May2008, pp.363–369.
[48] A. Langville, C. Meyer, Google’s PageRank and Beyond: The Science of Search Engine Rankings,
PrincetonUniversity Press, Princeton, NJ,2006.
[49] J. Leskovec, K. Langt, A. Dagupta, M. Mahoney, Statistical properties of community structure in large
socialandinformation networks, in: InternationalWorld WideWeb Conference,(WWW), 2008.
[50] H.Li,Performanceevaluation ingridcomputing: A modeling andprediction perspective,in:Seventh IEEE
InternationalSymposiumonClusterComputingandtheGrid(CCGrid2007),May2007,pp.869–874.
[51] Z.Y. Li, G. Xie, K. Hwang, Z.C. Li, Proximity-Aware overlay network for fast and churn resilient data
dissemination, in:IEEETransactions onParallel andDistributed Systems,Accepted to appear2011.


===== page 640 =====
References 617
[52] D. Linthicum, Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in Your Enterprise: A Step-by-Step Guide,
Addison WesleyProfessional, 2009.
[53] B.A. Lloyd, Professional networking on the Internet, in: Pulp and Paper Industry Technical Conference,
Birmingham, AL,2009, pp.62–66.
[54] X. Lou, K. Hwang, Collusive Piracy Prevention in P2P Content Delivery Networks, IEEE Trans. Compu-
ters 58(July) (2009)970–983.
[55] X. Lou, K. Hwang, Y. Hu, Accountable file indexing against poisoning DDoS attacks in P2P networks,
in: IEEEGlobecom, Honolulu, 3 November 2009.
[56] Magellan: A cloudfor science atArgonne. http://magellan.alcf.anl.gov/,(accessed 15.11.10).
[57] L. Mei, W. Chan, T. Tse, A tale of clouds: Paradigm comparisons and some thoughts on research issues,
in: IEEEAsia-Pacific ServicesComputing Conference, December 2008.
[58] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K.P. Gummadi, P. Druschel, B. Bhattacharjee, Measurement and analysis of
onlinesocialnetworks, in:The7thACMSIGCOMMConference onInternetMeasurement,October2007.
[59] J. Napper, P. Bientinesi, Can cloud computing reach the top500? in: Proceedings of the Combined Work-
shops on Unconventional High Performance Computing Workshop Plus Memory Access Workshop,
ACM, Ischia,Italy, 2009, pp.17–20.
[60] NimbusCloud Computing.http://workspace.globus.org/,2010.
[61] W. Norman, M. Paton, T. de Aragao, et al., Optimizing utility in cloud computing through autonomic
workload execution, in:IEEEComputer SocietyTechnical CommitteeonData Engineering, 2009.
[62] D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, et al., Eucalyptus: A technical report on an elastic utility comput-
ing architecture linking yourprograms touseful systems, UCSB, Santa Barbara,Technical Report, 2008.
[63] C. Olston, B. Reed, B.U. Srivastava, et al., Pig Latin: A not-so-foreign language for data processing,
in: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD Int’l Conf. on Management of Data, Vancouver, 9–12
June 2008.
[64] Open Cirrus, Welcome to Open Cirrus, the HP/Intel/Yahoo! Open Cloud Computing Research Testbed.
https://opencirrus.org/,(accessed20.11.10).
[65] M. Palankar, A. Onibokun, A. Iamnitchi, M. Ripeanu, Amazon S3 for science grids: A viable solution?
Computer ScienceandEngineering, University ofSouthFlorida, Technical Report, 2007.
[66] A. Passant, T. Hastrup, U. Bojars, J. Breslin, Microblogging: A semantic web and distributed approach,
in: 4thWorkshop onScriptingfor the Semantic Webin conjunction with ESWC2008.
[67] J.Qiu,T.Gunarathne,J.Ekanayake,etal.,Hybridcloudandclustercomputingparadigmsforlifescience
applications,in:11thAnnualBioinformaticsOpenSourceConference(BOSC2010),Boston,9–10July2010.
[68] J. Qiu, T. Ekanayake, T. Gunarathne, et al., Data Intensive Computing for Bioinformatics. http://grids.ucs
.indiana.edu/ptliupages/publications/DataIntensiveComputing_BookChapter.pdf,29December 2009.
[69] D. Reed, Clouds, clusters and ManyCore: The revolution ahead, in: IEEE International Conference on
Cluster Computing, 29September–1October 2008.
[70] J. Rittinghouse, J. Ransome, Cloud Computing: Implementation, Management and Security, CRC Pub-
lisher, 2010.
[71] B. Rochwerger, D. Breitgand, E. Levy, et al., The Reservoir Model and Architecture for Open Federated
CloudComputing, IBMSyst. J.(2008).
[72] V. Sanhu, The CERN Virtual Machine and Cloud Computing, B.S. Thesis at the Dept. of Physics,
University ofVictoria, Canada, 29January 2010.
[73] G. Santucci, The Internet of Things: Between the Revolution of the Internet and the Metamorphosis of
Objects. http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/rfid/documents/iotrevolution.pdf,2010.
[74] M. Satyanarayanan, V. Bahl, R. Caceres, N. Davies, The case for VM-based cloudlets in mobile comput-
ing, IEEEPervasiveComput. 8 (4) (2009)14–23.
[75] J. Schopf, F. Berman, Performance prediction in production environments, in: 12th International Parallel
Processing Symposium,Orlando,FL,April 1998, pp.647–653.


===== page 641 =====
618 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
[76] Science Clouds: Informal group of small clouds made available by various institutions on a voluntary
basis.http://scienceclouds.org/, (accessedNovember 2010).
[77] H. Song, Exploring Facebook and Twitter Technologies for P2P Social Networking, in: EE 657 Final
Project Report, University of SouthernCalifornia, May2010.
[78] H. Sundmaeker, P. Guillemin, P. Friess, S. Woelfflé, Vision and Challenges for Realising the Internet of
Things,European Union, March2010.
[79] Venus-C, Virtual Multidisciplinary Environmemnts Using Cloud Infrastructure. www.venus-c.eu/Pages/
Home.aspx,(accessed November 2010).
[80] E. Walker, Benchmarking Amazon EC2 for high-performance scientific computing, Login 33 (5) (2008)
18–23.
[81] E. Welbourne, L. Battle, G. Cole, et al., Building the Internet of things using RFID: the RFID ecosystem
experience, IEEEInternet Comput. 13(3) (2009)48–55.
[82] S. Wasserman, K. Faust, Social Networks Analysis: Methods and Applications, Cambridge University
Press,Cambridge, 1994.
[83] D.Watts,SmallWorlds:The Dynamics ofNetworksbetween Orderand Randomness,PrincetonUniversity
Press,Princeton,2003.
[84] M. Weng, A Multimedia Social Networking Community for Mobile Devices, Tisch School of The Arts,
NewYorkUniversity, 2007.
[85] Wikipedia,Cyber-physical systems. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyber-physical_system,2010.
[86] Wikipedia,Social Network. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_network,2010.
[87] Wikipedia,Facebook. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook,March3, 2011.
[88] Wikipedia, Mashup (web app hybrid). http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mashup_%28web_application_hybrid%,
29November 2010.
[89] Y. Wu, K. Hwang, Y. Yuan, C. Wu, Adaptive workload prediction of grid performance in confidence
windows,IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.Syst.21(July) (2010)925–938.
[90] Z. Xu, K. Hwang, Early prediction of MPP performance: SP2, T3D, and paragon experiences, J. Parallel
Comput.22(7) (1996)917–942.
[91] L.Yan,Y.Zhang,L.T.Yang,H.Ning,TheInternetofThings:FromRFIDtotheNext-GenerationPervasive
NetworkedSystems,AuerbachPublications,2008.
[92] B.Yan,G.Huang,SupplychaininformationtransmissionbasedonRFIDandInternetofthings,in:Interna-
tional Colloquium on Computing, Communication, Control, and Management (CCCM 2009) Vol. 4, 2009,
pp.166–169.
[93] M. Yigitbasi, A. Iosup, D. Epema, C-Meter: a framework for performance analysis of computing clouds,
in:International WorkshoponCloudComputing, May2009.
[94] B.J. Zhang, Y. Ruan, T.L. Wu, J. Qiu, A. Hughes, G. Fox, Applying twister to scientific applications, in:
International Conference on Cloud Computing (CloudCom 2010), http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/
publications/PID1510523.pdf,2010.
HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Problem 9.1
Describe the shortcomings of mobile devices and distance clouds for mobile cloud computing.
Explain how the cloudlets developed at CMU can alleviate these shortcomings to enable mobile
cloud computing requests submitted from handheld pervasive devices.


===== page 642 =====
Homework Problems 619
Problem 9.2
Answer the following two questions on GPSes:
a. Compare the four satellite positioning systems developed in the United States, Russia, the
European Union, and China, in terms of their satellite technology, deployment architecture,
coverage areas, precision, capability, and application areas.
b. Explain why a GPS receiver needs to use the signals from four satellites to locate a single point
(a 3D location) on the Earth’s surface.
Problem 9.3
What are the differences between active RFID and passive RFID? Comment on their advantages
and limitations. Do the same for active versus passive GPS receivers.
Problem 9.4
Compare Facebook and Twitter in four reported applications and discuss their relative strengths and
weaknesses in these applications.
Problem 9.5
Workload traces on AuverGrid can be described with three workload patterns including sudden
level change, sudden fluctuation, and gradual level change. What are the three load patterns and
how would you characterize their potential impact on the performance prediction results?
Problem 9.6
The IoT differs from the traditional Internet in many ways. Identify their differences and describe
their distictions in connecting entities, infrastructure and networking, and application domains.
Problem 9.7
Distinguish the following pairs of terminologies:
a. Open source versus proprietary operating systems
b. Internet of Things versus cyber-physical systems
c. Social networks versus professional networks
Problem 9.8
Answer the following two questions on wireless sensor networks:
a. Characterize three generations of wireless sensor networks in terms of their size, weight, power
supply, deployment, and so on.
b. Low power operation is desired in using a wireless sensor network (WSN). Plot the desired
power distribution in using a WSN. You should explain how to minimize power consumption
by operating the WSN in three modes periodically.


===== page 643 =====
620 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Problem 9.9
Explain how to apply the RFID technology in merchandise positioning during transportation and
counting of the remaining goods in a supermarket.
Problem 9.10
Describe the following technology terms, functional modules, and cloud services associated the
IBM Blue Cloud and RC2 cloud. You may need to get more information from IBM’s web sites or
the IBM Journal of Research and Development for reported achievements.
a. IBM WebSphere
b. Tivoli Service Automation Manager (TSAM)
c. IBM Research Compute Cloud (RC2)
d. Tivoli provisioning manager
e. Linux with Xen
Problem 9.11
Conduct research on the possible use of cloud resources for processing data collected in selected IoT
applications (see Figure 9.19). Propose a solution scheme and the possible cloud resources needed.
You can narrow down the scope of sensor data collected to control the complexity involved.
Problem 9.12
Study the performance metrics for HPC applications (Section 9.2.2) and HTC applications (Section
9.2.3). Research how to improve their accuracy and effectiveness through analysis of real-life HPC
and HTC benchmark experiments on data-center clusters or on cloud platforms that you have
accessed. Suggest new or improved performance metrics that can cover more machine characteris-
tics and application parameters identified in the benchmark experiments.
Problem 9.13
Briefly explain how Facebook and Twitter cope with the security, privacy and copyright violation
issues in online social networking applications. Common protection techniques and unique solutions
to each system should be treated, separtely.
Problem 9.14
Match the following 20 names or abbreviated terms in the left column with the best-match defini-
tions or descriptions in the right column.
Term DescriptiontoBeMappedwiththeTermsontheLeftColumn
_____MySpace a) Theworld’slargestsocialnetworkintermsofregistereduserstoday
_____Cloudlet b) Asocialnetworkmainlyusedforvideostripforwardingapplications
_____Bluetooth c) AnaturalextensionoftheInternetinvolvinghumansintheloopofcontrol
_____IoT d) Asocialnetworkformicrobloggingandnewsalertapplications
_____WiMAX e) AradiotaggingtechnologyusedinInternetofThingsconstruction


===== page 644 =====
Homework Problems 621
—cont’d
Term DescriptiontoBeMappedwiththeTermsontheLeftColumn
_____RFID f) Aninfrastructurethatsupportsremotecloudaccessbymobiledevices
_____ZigBee g) AprivatecloudbuiltbyIBMforinternaluseinR&Dapplications
_____GPS h) AnInternetextensionforinterconnectingallobjects,people,animals,andproducts
_____Facebook i) AnInternetaccesstechnologyusedmainlyforitsspeedandflexibility
_____YouTube j) Themostscalablewirelesssensornetwork
_____Twitter k) AfixedwirelesstechnologyforbroadbandInternetaccess
_____Nebula l) Asatellitetechnologyforlocation-sensitiveapplications
_____CPS m) Awirelesstechnologyusedtoreplacecablesinshort-rangeapplications
_____RC2 n) OneofthemostfrequentlyusedSaaSapplicationsinthebusinessworld
_____LinkedIn o) AsocialnetworkmainlyusedinprofessionalnetworkingovertheInternet
_____WiFi p) Asocialnetworkwebsitespecializedincustomizedsocialservices
_____CRM q) Alargeprivatecloudusedinitiallyforaerospaceandweatherforecastingapplications
_____Cloudlet r) ApubliccloudusedinIaaSapplicationsunderapay-as-you-gobillingsystem
Problem 9.15
Circle only one answer in each of the following multiple-choice questions:
1. Which one of the following social network properties is correctly stated?
a. The structure holes can be eliminated by filling one or more links to other nodes.
b. The local bridge consists of only one link, like a bridge.
c. The centrality has nothing to do with the node degree.
2. Which design choice was NOT adopted in the Kimberley cloudlet prototype at CMU?
a. The use of an imported virtual machine (VM) from a mobile device.
b. A base VM is deployed in the cloudlet host machine.
c. An imported VM, once deployed in the cloudlet, cannot be removed.
3. Which of the following descriptions of the Internet of Things is correctly stated?
a. The IoT does not apply GPS technology in supply chain management.
b. A smart grid does not explore solar energy or wind power.
c. ZigBee networks are more scalable than WiFi and Bluetooth networks.
4. Which of the following assessments on today’s Facebook applications is correctly stated?
a. The most popular use of Facebook today is to enhance communication.
b. Gift sending and dating services are not supported by Facebook.
c. Personal profiles of Twitter users are better supported than those for Facebook users.
Problem 9.16
Conduct a Google search for technical information on the following two large-scale private clouds.
Describe what you have found out from reliable sources of information. Try to reveal the cloud
platform architecture and its infrastructure bases and scope of major applications.
a. The private cloud under development by NASA in the United States
b. The private cloud under development by CERN in Europe


===== page 645 =====
622 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Problem 9.17
Briefly describe the following technology terms, functional modules, and cloud services associated
with the SGI Cyclone cloud engine:
a. Scale-up, scale-out, and hybrid management of cloud servers
b. SGI Altix servers and ICE clusters
c. Reported Cyclone HPC applications
Problem 9.18
This problem is related to Example 9.13. Prove that the identification of the attack accounts (sub-
graph H) and the tracing of the targeted users are solvable mathematically.


===== page 646 =====
Index
Pagenumbersinitalicsindicatefiguresandtables
@Swineburne,30 Amber,321
2128IPaddresses,13 Amdahl’slaw,47
3Dprinting,11 AMGA(ARDAMetadataforGridApplications),309
3Dtorusinterconnect,117–118,118 Amoeba,41,41
80hinterrupt,147 AMQP.SeeAdvancedMessageQueuingProtocol(AMQP)
Anabas,293
A
Analyticalultracentrifuge(AUC),295
ABI.SeeApplicationBinaryInterface(ABI) AndrewFileSystem(AFS),90
Accesscontrol,465 Aneka,203,393–398
Accessrouters(ARs),195 advantagesof,394
Accountingmodule,440 applicationofMayarenderingcasestudy,397–398
ACOM,513 architectureandcomponents,394,396–398
Activestate,160 capabilities,395
ActiveMQ,291,292 virtualappliances,398
Activeness,99 Anomalydetection,253–255
Active-takeoverclusters,99 Anonymity,481,488
Adhocconnectivity,481 Apache,529
Adaptation,inprogrammingmodel,8 ApacheMaven,303
Adaptivehybridmodel(AH-Model),forworkload APIs(applicationprogramminginterfaces),419
prediction,460 grid,444
Adaptiveworkloadprediction,458–459,458 UDDI,306
AdvancedMessageQueuingProtocol(AMQP),291 Appliances,384
AdvancedQueuing,308 virtual,23,398
Agility,558 ApplicationBinaryInterface(ABI),138
AIX/OS,72 Applicationisolation,133
AkamaiCDN,529 Applicationlayer,52,52–53,88,419
ALICE,554–555 incloudarchitecture,218,218
AliEn,554 inmultitierarchitecture,282,283
AlliancetoSaveEnergy(ASE),51 Applicationlevel
AltixICE,550–551 checkpointingat,101–102
Amazon,228,246,336,548 virtualization,132
AmazonDynamo.SeeDynamo Applicationsandboxing,133
AmazonEBS.SeeElasticBlockStore(EBS) Applicationservices,396
AmazonEC2.SeeElasticComputeCloud(EC2) Applicationstreaming,133
AmazonElasticMapReduce,203 Applicationtrafficsupport,208–209
AmazonMachineImages(AMIs),380,380 Applications
AmazonS3(SimpleStorageService),242,275–276, asynchronous,369
382–383,383 classificationof,369
AmazonSimpleQueue,292 data-intensive,546
AmazonVPC,201–203,202 flexibilityindeploymentof,8
AmazonWebServices(AWS),193,231–233,548 HPC,9
infrastructure,232 HTC,9
mashupon,556–557 ofIoT,590–597
programmingon,379–387 looselysynchronous,369,371
serviceofferings,228,229,233 scalability,45
virtualizationsupportin,224 socialnetworking,603–608
virtualizedresourcesin,223 third-party,244
623


===== page 647 =====
624 Index
ARCHinterconnect,114,115 BirdBath,289–288
ASE.SeeAlliancetoSaveEnergy(ASE) Bitcoin,497
Astrolabe,313 Bit-levelparallelism(BL),9
Asynchronousapplications,369 BitTorrent,497,525–528,526–527,531,531
AtomPublishingProtocol(APP),306 BLASTprogram,321
Atonomiccomputing,26 Blobs,340,385
Attributeauthorities,465 Blobstore,372
Authentication,89,464–465 Blockblobs,385
inGSI,468 Blockreports,356
improper,50 BLP.SeeBit-levelparallelism(BL)
mutual,468,469,469 BlueCloud,193,228,238,549–550,549
Authorization BlueGene/L,78–79
foraccesscontrol,465 BOINC(BerkeleyOpenInfrastructureforNetwork
inGSI,466 Computing),87,417,420,429,444
methods,464–465 Bootstrapagent,534
models,465,465 Borderrouters(BRs),195
Authorizationagentmodel,465,465 Bottlenecks,226,242
Automation,datacenter,169–179 sequential,47
Autonomoussystem(AS),487 BPEL.SeeBusinessProcessExecutionLanguage(BPEL)
Auto-regression(AR)method,459,461 BPMN.SeeBusinessProcessModelingNotation(BPMN)
Auto-scaling,380 BPSS.SeeBusinessProcessSpecificationSchema(BPSS)
AuverGrid,458,461 Bridge,602
Availability,49,70,95,98,176,570 Broadbandoverpowerlinetechnology,11
cloudsand,339 Brokeringsystems,379
ofcomputersystemtypes,96 Bufferoverflows,251
costanalysisand,101 Bulletinboardservices(BBS),598
failurerateand,95–96 Bush,Vannevar,547
levelsof,99 Businessgrids,417
node,108 Businesslogiclayer,283
Availabilityclusters,77 BusinessProcessExecutionLanguage(BPEL),317,320
AWS.SeeAmazonWebServices(AWS) BusinessProcessExecutionLanguageforWebServices
Azure.SeeMicrosoftAzure (BPEL4WS),279
AzureTable,336,341,386–387 BusinessProcessModelingNotation(BPMN),317
BusinessProcessSpecificationSchema(BPSS),317
B
BusinessTransactionProtocol(BTP),317
Backupcomponents,98 BusinessEntity,305
Backwardrecovery,100 BusinessService,305
Baremetal,575–576 Buyya,Rajkumar,6
Bare-metalVM,23
C
Batchjobs,107
BCubenetwork,212,212,214 Caching,372,425
Behavior-sensitiveinstructions,147 Calendarscheduling,104
BEinGRID,429 CAM-Chord,513
Beowulfclusters,71 CAN(ContentAddressableNetwork),498,500–501,500,
SeealsoComputeclusters 504,505
BerkeleyNOW,66 cceHUB.org,297
Betweenness,601 CDC6400,4
BigTable,42,313,341,376–379,377 CDNs.SeeContentdeliverynetworks(CDNs)
Binarytranslation,withfullvirtualization,141–143,142 Cell/B.E.processors,119
BindingTemplate,305 CellularDisco,165,166
Bioinformatics,321–323 Centralizedclusters,68
Biometrics,577 Centralizedcomputing,6–7,193


===== page 648 =====
Index 625
Centralizednetworks,602 QoSand,220–221
Centralizedreputationsystems,258 resourceprovisioningandplatformdevelopment,
Centralizedsystems,7 237–243
CERN.SeeEuropeanCouncilforNuclearResearch(CERN) virtualizationsupportand,221–225,222
Certificateauthorities(CAs),424,464,468–469 Cloudcomputing,5,7,26,35,417
CGSP.SeeChinaGridSupportPlatform(CGSP) SeealsoClouds
Chatter,552 advantagesof,28,36
Checkpointfile,101 benefitsof,193
Checkpointinterval,102,102 challenges,135
Checkpointing,101–104 conceptof,192
choosingoptimalinterval,102 costmodel,197–198,198
coordinatedversusindependent,104 datacentervirtualizationfor,25–26
forked,103 datafeaturesanddatabases,340–341
incremental,102 definitionof,34
kernel,library,andapplicationlevels,101–102 deploymentmodes,36
overheads,102 designobjectives,197–198
parallelprograms,103–104,103 ecosystems,199–200
user-directed,103 emergenceof,135
Checkpoints,97 emergingsoftwareenvironments,387–398
ChemicalInformaticsGrid,288–289 extendedservices,235–237,235
ChemistryDevelopmentKit(CDK),288–289 gridsand,456
ChinaEducationandResearchNetwork(CERNET),434 growthof,6
ChinaGrid,31,428,434 IaaSmodel,200–203
ChinaGridSuperVision(CGSV),438,438 inter-cloudresourcemanagement,234–249
ChinaGridSupportPlatform(CGSP),434–435,444,452–455 marketplaces,215
components,453 middlewareapplications,291–294
functionalbuildingblocks,454 mobile,558–561
jobexecutionflow,453–455 overInternet,34–36
ChinaGridSupportingPlatform(CGSP),440 PaaSmodel,203–206,203
Chipmultiprocessors(CMPs),9,170 paradigm,196
Chord,497,498–499,499–500,503,504,505–507,524 performanceof,561–576
Chrootcommand,137 platforms,27
Chubby,378,379 programmingandruntimesupport,341–343
Churnresilience,489–490,512–514 qualityofservicein,572–574
Churn-ResilientProtocol(CRP),512,513 SaaSmodel,205–206
CICCservices,288–289 servicemodels,35,36,192–206,228
Clientmachines,5 softwareenvironmentsfor,36–44
Clientnodes,109 softwarestackfor,236–237
Client/serverarchitecture,32,482,482 systemmodelsfor,27–36
Clockrate,21 technology,11
Closeness,602 trendsin,546–547
Cloudarchitecture,215–227 ubiquitouscomputingand,546–561
AmazonWebServices(AWS),231–233 vs.utilitycomputing,10–11
challengesof,225–227 CloudExchange(CEx),248
design,215–217 Cloudmanagementtools,200
disasterrecoveryand,223,224–225 Cloudmanagers,199
generic,216–217,217 Cloudmashups,206,555–558
GoogleAppEngine(GAE),229–231 advantagesof,558
hardwarevirtualizationand,221–223 conceptof,556–557,556
layereddevelopmentof,218–221,218 contentfor,306
market-oriented,219–220,220 definitionof,306
MicrosoftAzure,233–234 experimentalresults,557–558,557


===== page 649 =====
626 Index
Cloudmashups(Cont.) ClueWebdatasets,355,355
lessonlearnedabout,558 Clustercomputeinstances,382,382
RESTfulWebservicesand,276 Clusterjobs
Cloudofclouds,40 managementsystems,107–109
Cloudofgrids,40 schedulingmethods,104–106,105
CloudOS,forvirtualizeddatacenters,172–176 types,107
Cloudprogrammingmodels,343 Clusteroperatingsystem,29,76
Cloudresources Clusteringcoefficient,602
globalexchangeof,246–249 Cluster-on-Demand(COD),165,166–167,166–167
inter-cloudmanagementof,234–249,248 Clusters,5,27,27–29,546
provisioningof,237–243 active-takeover,99
Cloudsecurity,249–260,339,561 architecture,28,28,75–87
challenges,251 availability,77
copyrightprotection,252 compute,71
dataandsoftwareprotectiontechniques,255–257 dedicatedvs.enterprise,69
datacoloring,256–257,256 definitionof,66
datalock-inproblem,257 designissues,29,30,69–71
defensestrategies,249–253,250–251 designobjectives,68–69
distributedintrusion/anomalydetection,253 designprinciples,87–104
firewalls,252,253 developmenttrends,66–68
gateways,252,253 failover,99
privacyprotection,252–253,255–256 familyclassification,71
virtualizationand,252 fault-tolerance,99–101
watermarking,256–257,256 GPU,83–87
Cloudserviceproviders,546–552,548 gridsof,369
Cloudservices,235–237 HA,71
provisioningof,237–238 hardware,software,andmiddlewaresupport,29,83
Cloudwatermarking,256,256–257 hotstandby,99
Cloudera,343 integrated,159
CloudFront,226,232 jobandresourcemanagement,104–112
Cloudlets,558–561 Linux,41–42
vs.clouds,559,560 loadsharingfacility(LSF)for,109–110
conceptof,559,559 load-balancing,71
fastVMsynthesisin,560 managementof,338
Clouds,7,27,34–36,35,416 formassiveparallelism,66–75
benchmarking,574–576 milestonesystems,67–68
capabilities,336,337 monitoring,237
vs.cloudlets,559,560 networksof,7
datatransportand,337–339 organizationandresourcesharing,76–77
data-intensive,369 physical,155
developmenttrends,196 physicalvs.virtual,156–159,156
enablingtechnologiesfor,215–216,216 resourcesharing,78
featuresof,336–343,338–339 server,194
versusgrids,40 shared-memory,77
virtualgrids,419 single-systemimage,29,87–95
hybrid,194,194,199,218 systeminterconnects,80–82,80
performance,568–572 virtual.SeeVirtualclusters
private,193–194,194,196,199–200,552–555 workloadbehavior,107
public,193,194,199 CMPs.SeeChipmultiprocessors(CMPs)
scalability,226 CNK/SLES9,73
scienceandresearch,562–566 CNL/OS,73
CloudWatch,232,380 Coarse-grainmultithreadedprocessor,16


===== page 650 =====
Index 627
Codeinterpretation,132 Consumer-generatedmedia,11
Cohesion,602 Containers,135,450–452
Collaboration,483 ContentAddressableNetwork(CAN),498,500–501,
Collaborativeplatform,33 500,504,505
Collectivelayer,419 ContentAddressableStorage(CAS),171
Colluders,533,535–536 Contentdeliveryapplications,5,529–532
Collusivepiracy,490,533,535–538 Contentdeliverynetworks(CDNs),529–532
Combinerfunction,349 deliverymethods,532
Commoditytechnologies,8 filechunkingandhashingschemesin,531,531
Communication,13 generationsof,530
amongworkers,344 global,529–530,530
internode,70 Contentdistribution,483
intracluster,69 Contentpoisoning,533,535,535
P2P,480–492 Content-basedsystems,307
CommunicationasaService(CaaS),235 Continuousavailability(CA),571
Communities,onsocialnetworks,604–605 Control,13,68
Communityengine,611 singlepointof,88,92
Compactclusters,68 Control-sensitiveinstructions,147
Componentgrids,314 Convergence,oftechnologies,26
Computation,13 Convergenceoverhead,520–521,521
Computationpartitioning,344,349 CoopNet,497
Computationtime,437 Coordinatedcheckpointing,104
ComputationalChemistryGrid(CCG),295 CoordinatedTeraGridSoftwareandServices(CTSS),431
Computationalfluiddynamics(CFD),550 Copyrightprotection,50,252–253,531,533–534,534
Computationalgrids,7,27,30–31,71,417 Copyrightviolations,33
Computation-intensiveapplications,425 CoralContentDistributionNetwork,497
Computeclusters,71 CORBA,37–38,321
Computenodes,77,88 CORBATradingService,38
Computeresources,provisioningof,237–238 Coreswitches,210
Computer,definitionof,6 Costeffectiveness,571–572
Computerclusters.SeeClusters CouchDB,341
Computerroomairconditioning(CRAC),25,208 COW(CopyonWrite)format,158
ComputerScienceandTelecommunicationBoard CPS.SeeCyber-physicalsystems(CPS)
(CSTB),26 CPUscavenging,419–422
Computertechnology,platformevolution,4 CPUspeed,8,14,45
Computingparadigms CPUvirtualization,147–148
distinctionsamong,6–7 CPUs
new,6 advancesin,14,14–15
Computingsystems,classificationof,27,27 architecture,16
Concurrency,8 dynamicallocationof,170
Concurrentcomputing,7 multicoreCPUs,14–16
Concurrentprogramming,7 powerefficiency,19–20
Condor,312,320,444 schematic,15
Condor-G,288–289,294,442,444,444 Crayinterconnect,81
Confidencewindow,458 CrayXT5Jaguar,78,116–119
Confidentiality,49–50 3Dtorusinterconnect,117–118,118
Connectivitylayer,417–418 featuresof,116
Consistency,528 hardwarepackaging,118–119
Consistentcheckpointing,104 interconnectrouterdesign,117
Consistenthashing,497 Cronservice,373
Consistentsnapshots,104 CRP.SeeChurn-ResilientProtocol(CRP)
Consumerrelationshipmanagement(CRM),35 CRUD(create,read,update,delete)operations,274,304


===== page 651 =====
628 Index
Cryptography,256 Datagrids,7,27,31,31
CSCW(computer-supportedcooperativework),492 SeealsoComputationalgrids
CUDA(ComputeUnifiedDeviceArchitecture) Dataintegrity,49–51,255–256
parallelprogramming,86 Datalayer,282,283
programminginterfaces,86–87 Datalocality,487
usagetrends,87 Datalock-inproblem,225,257
CUDAC,86 Datamanagement
CUDAcores,18,19 services,284
CUDAmodel,17 usingGT4library,451–452
Cumulus,389 DataNucleusAccess,370
Customerrelationshipmanagement(CRM),236 Dataparallelism,319
CuteFTP,529 Datapartitioning,344,348
Cyber-physicalsystems(CPS),6,13,590,595–597 Dataprivacy,225–226
Cyclicgraphs,320 Dataprotectioninfrastructure,50–51
Cyclone,550,551 Datareplication,425–426
Dataservices,SQLAzure,386–387
D
Datasources,567
δflow,352 Datatransfertime,436
D4Science,429 Datatransfers,parallelvs.striped,427
DAG.SeeDirectedacrylicgraph(DAG) Datatransport,337–339
Dally,Bill,19 Databases,304–314
Data monitoring,313
managementof,338 NOSQLnonrelational,341,370
structuredandsemistructured,376 publish-subscribemodeland,307–308
inUDDIregistry,305 relational,340–341
Dataaccessmodels,426,427 DataGrid,417,428,431–434
DataasaService(DaaS),235 Data-intensiveapplications,546
Datacenters,53 Data-intensiveclouds,369
automation,26,456 Data-intensivegridservicemodels,425–427
cloudOSforvirtualized,172–176 Data-intensivescalablecomputing(DISC),561,
constructionrequirements,206–207 566–567,568
coolingsystems,207–208,208 Data-levelparallelism(DLP),9
designof,206–208 Datingservices,onsocialnetworks,607
green,224 DCE,41,41
growthandcostbreakdown,25,25 DDoS.SeeDistributeddenialofservice(DDoS)
interconnectionnetworks,208–211,214 Debugging,226
low-costdesignphilosophy,25–26 DECPDP11,4
managementissues,213–215 Decentralization,481
modular,211–212,211 Decentralizedclusters,68
networkingstructure,194–196,195 Decentralizednetworks,602
reputation-guidedprotectionof,257–260 Dedicatedclusters,69
serverconsolidationin,169–170 Dedicatedmode,104
server-centricdesign,210,212–213 Degradation,209
switch-centricdesign,210–211 Degreeofparallelism(DoP),9
trustmanagementofvirtualized,176–179 Delegation,468–469
virtualstoragemanagement,171–172 trust,469–470,470
virtualization,forcloudcomputing,25–26 Delegationservice,448
virtualizationforautomationof,169–179 DELETE,274
warehouse-scale,206–208,207 Demand-drivenresourceprovisioning,239,240
Datacoloring,256–257,256 Denialofservice(DoS),49,251,489
Datadeluge,26 DepartmentofDefense(DoD),287–288
Datadistribution,349 Dependability,8,45


===== page 652 =====
Index 629
Deployment Distributedsystems,7
dynamic,ofvirtualclusters,165–169 familiesof,7–8
fast,158 operationallayers,52
ofVMs,158 performanceof,45,561–576
DevelopmentalTherapeuticsProgram(DTP),288 scalabilityanalysis,45–48
Deviceemulation,150,151 softwareenvironmentsfor,36–44
Digitalsignatures,468 systemavailability,48,49
Digitalwatermarking,531 technologiesfor,13–26
DirectCompute,86 trendstoward,40–42
Directedacrylicgraph(DAG),359,369 workflows,314–322
Directories Distributedtransactionprocessing,10
global,90 Distributedvirtualenvironment(DVE),241
homedirectory,90 DLP.SeeData-levelparallelism(DLP)
system,90 Domainnamesystem(DNS),89,89,384
Disasterrecovery,223,224–225 DoS.SeeDenialofservice(DoS)
DISC.SeeData-intensivescalablecomputing(DISC) Double-precision(DP)calculations,84
DiscoverMiddleware,321 Downtime,96,98
Discoveryservices,304 DPFS,340
Disktechnology,20,21 DRAMchips,20
Distributedcomputing,6 Drives,340
SeealsoParallelanddistributedprogramming Dryad,312–313,342,342,353,359–365,360
vs.centralizedcomputing,193 DryadLINQ,353,354,361–365,366
changesin,546 Dual-coreprocessor,15,16
computerutilitiesin,10 DVE.SeeDistributedvirtualenvironment(DVE)
discovery,registries,metadata,anddatabases, DVEmanager,241
304–314 Dynamicbinarytranslation,132
energyefficiencyin,51–54 Dynamicdeployment,ofvirtualclusters,165–169
onP2Pnetwork,483 Dynamicheterogeneity,153
systemclassification,27 Dynamicmode,105
systemmodelsfor,27–36 Dynamicpowermanagement(DPM),53
Distributeddatamanagementsystem,312–313 Dynamicpriority,104
Distributeddenialofservice(DDoS),225,254–255,254, Dynamicreplication,425–426
489,522–523 Dynamicresourcedeployment,239–241
Distributedfilesharing,5,33,33,493–496 Dynamicvoltage-frequencyscaling(DVFS),53–54,54
Distributedfilesystem(DFS),242,390 Dynamo,313
Distributedhashtables(DHTs),259,480,496–497,496–497,
519–520 E
Distributedintrusiondetectionsystems(DIDSes),252 EarthSimulator,51
Distributedoperatingsystems,40–42 EBS.SeeElasticBlockStore(EBS)
Amoeba,41,41 EbXML(ElectronicBusinessusingeXtensibleMarkup
comparisonof,41 Language),38
DCE,41,41 EC2.SeeElasticComputeCloud(EC2)
MOSIX2,41–42,41 EC2ComputeUnits(ECUs),382
DistributedP2Pcomputing,33,33 Ecademy.com,606
Distributedpowermanagement(DPM),51,54 EchelonGPUcluster,84,85–86
Distributedprogram,7 Eclipseplug-in,370
Distributedprogramming,7 EDG.SeeEuropeanDataGrid(EDG)
models,42–44,43 Educationalapplications,ofsocialnetworks,605,605
DistributedRAID,93,94 Efficiency,297
Distributedrankingmodule,520 Efficiency,8,569–570
Distributedreputationsystems,258 EGEE(EnablingGridsforE-SciencE),30,428–429
Distributedstorage,226 EGEENetworkOperationsCenter(ENOC),429


===== page 653 =====
630 Index
EigenTrust,517,518,521 Expendedpagetable(EPT),149–150
ElasticBlockStore(EBS),231,242,340,383–384 Exposedclusters,69
ElasticComputeCloud(EC2),156,202,229,238,252,380–384
benchmarking,574–576 F
executionenvironment,381 Fabriclayer,418
instancetypesavailableon,381 Fabricservices,396
performanceanalysis,574 Facebook,480,597,599,608–611,609–610
performanceresults,240 Factors,423
programmingon,380–382 Failback,83,99
useof,inAWSplatform,381–382 Failbackfeature,99
VMmanager,244 Failover,83
ElasticComputingPlatform,548 Failoverclusters,99
Elasticloadbalancing,203,380 Failureanalysis,511
ElasticMapReduce,379,575 Failuredetection,83,424
EliLilyCompany,205 Failurediagnosis,99–100
E-mailsystems,242 Failurenotification,99
E-mailtraffic,480 Failurerate,95–96
Embeddedsystems,595 Failurerecovery,99–100,509–511
EMC,177 Failures
EMule,531,531,538 churnresilienceagainst,512–513
Enablingtechnologies,forInternetofThings,576–590,578 costanalysis,100–101
Enclosedclusters,69 node,510
Encryption,467 partialvs.total,97
Endpointreference(EPR),287 plannedvs.unplanned,96
Energyconsumption transientvs.permanent,96–97
reducing,52 Fastdeployment,158
ofunusedservers,51 Fat-treeinterconnectiontopology,210,210
Energyefficiency,51–54 Faulttolerance,37,48,51,70–71,209,356,481,509–511
Enomaly,548 Fault-resilientsystems,98
Enterprisebus,289–290,290 Fault-tolerantclusters,99–101
Enterpriseclusters,69 Federationaccessmodel,426,427
Enterprisemultitierarchitecture,282,282–283 Fermi(GF110)chip,86
Enterpriseresourcesplanning(ERP),35 FermiGPU,17,18,19,87
Entitycertificates,466 Filehierarchy,single,90
Entitygroups,372 Filesharing,483,483,490,523–538
Environmentalmonitoring,293 distributed,493–496
Erdos-Renyirandomgraph,493 Filesystemmigration,162–163
eSpeak,417 Files
ESXServer,144,145 checkpoint,101
Ethernet,22,80,80–81 global,90
Eucalyptus,173–174,173–174,371,387–389 local,90
EuropeanCouncilforNuclearResearch(CERN),196,552–555 remote,90
EuropeanDataGrid(EDG),426,431–434 visibilityof,91
architecture,432–433 File-sharingapplications
datadistributionin,433–434,433 BitTorrent,525–528
EuropeanGridInfrastructure,428 copyrightprotectionand,533
EuropeanUnion,428,431–434 replicationandconsistencyin,528
Eventscheduling,104 searchalgorithms,524–528
Event-drivenresourceprovisioning,238–239,240 Filterservices(fs),39
Exascalesystems,17–20,20,86 Fine-grainmultithreadedprocessor,16
Executionmanagementservices,284 Fingertables,499–500,506–507
Executiontime,47 Firewalls,50,252,253,484


===== page 654 =====
Index 631
Fixedworkload,47 Globalaccessofsecondarystorage,447
Fixed-workloadspeedup,47 Globaldirectory,90
Flatclassification,436 Globalfiles,90
Flexibility,inapplicationdeployment,8 GlobalGridForum(GGF),422
FlexiScale,202 GlobalInformationGrid(GiG),287
Floodingalgorithms,524–525 Globalpositioningsystem(GPS),6,11,587–590
Flooding-baseddeliverymethods,532 operatingprinciplesof,588–589
FMA(fusedmultiplyandadd)operations,18 passivevs.active,587–588
Folding@Home,420 real-timevehicletrackingusing,590
Force.com,193,203,228,229,552 triangulationlocationcalculation,589–590
Foreignjobs,107,109 workingsof,587
Forkedcheckpointing,103 worldwidedeploymentstatus,590
Forwardrecovery,100 Globalreputationaggregation,516–517,520
Foster,Ian,416 Globalreputationscore,515,518
Foundationservices,396 Globalsnapshots,103–104
Four-issuesuperscalarprocessor,16 GlobalHub.org,297,300
Fread,91 GlobusContainer,451
Freenet,505–506,506 GlobusProject,416
Free-ridingproblem,488 GlobusSecurityInfrastructure(GSI),444,447,447,451,
Fulldataflow,352 466–470
Fullvirtualization,141–143 authenticationanddelegation,468–469
Functionalparallelism,319 functionallayers,466–467,466
FutureGrid,340,343,429,562–563,562,564 message-levelsecurity,467
Fuzzytheory,456,456 transport-levelsecurity,467
Fuzzytrustmodel,463 GlobusToolkit,44,44,280,294,422,433,435,439,
FVM(Feather-WeightVirtualMachines),137 443,444
Fwrite,91 architecture,446–449
client-Globusinteractions,448–449,449
G datamanagementusing,451–452
GAE.SeeGoogleAppEngine(GAE) GT4library,446–448,447
Gage,John,6 jobworkflow,448,448
Gametheory,456–457,456 GLUE,444
Gangscheduling,106 Gmail,205,231
Gang-schedulingskew,106 Gnutella,482,482,493–496
Gannon,Dennis,206 complexityproperties,504
GASSmodule,447,447 embeddingChordontopof,503
Gatewaynodes,194 filechunkingandhashingschemesin,531,531
Gateways,252,253 floodingscheme,495,501
GE,14 searchperformance,525
GeForce256,17–20 GOATproject,293
GeForce8800,17 GoCast,513
General-purposecomputingonGPUs(GPGPU),17,85 GoFront,397–398
Generativetopographicmapping(GTM),574 GoGrid,202,205,548
Geographiclayout,508 Google,228,548
GET,274 GoogleAccounts,373
Getoperation,497 GoogleAppEngine(GAE),193,203,204–205,229–231,
GetRight,529 336,548
GFACtool,301–302 applications,231
GFS.SeeGoogleFileSystem(GFS) architecture,229–230,230
GigabitEthernet,22,25,81 cloudinfrastructure,229
Gigabitspersecond(Gbps),14 functionalmodules,230–231
Gilder’slaw,8 mashupon,556–557


===== page 655 =====
632 Index
GoogleAppEngine(GAE)(Cont.) Gridcomputing,26
platform,204 applicationtrends,455–470
programmingsupport,370–379,372 economymodelfor,440,441
serviceofferings,228 goals,416
virtualizationsupportin,224 infrastructures,29–31,31
virtualizedresourcesin,223 OpenGridServicesArchitecture(OGSA),44
GoogleBigTable.SeeBigTable softwareandmiddlewarefor,443–455
GoogleDataAPI,372 Griddataaccessmodels,426,427
GoogleDocs,229,231 Gridfamilies,31,417,417
GoogleEarth,231,242,376 GridInformationServices(GISes)agencies,420
GoogleFileSystem(GFS),312–313,373–375 GridInfrastructureGroup(GIG),430
architecture,374 Gridofclouds,40
datamutationsequencein,374,374 Gridofgrids,314–315
features,242,242 Gridresourcebrokers,442
MapReduceand,351 Gridresourcemanagement,435–443
GoogleMapReduce.SeeMapReduce jobscheduling,435–437
GoogleSDCSecureDataConnection,372 resourcemanagementsystem(RMS),435
Googlesearchengine,231 resourcemonitoring,437,437–438
Googlesearchenginecluster,67 serviceaccountingandeconomymodel,439–440
architecture,80 usingGRAM,450–451
crossbarswitch,81 Gridresources,418–419
GoogleWebToolkit(GWT),370 aggregating,418,420
GossipTrust,535 allocationof,419,436,439
Governmentapplications,ofsocialnetworks,606 brokering,440–443,441
GPS.SeeGlobalpositioningsystem(GPS);Grids GridServiceHandles(GSHs),286,423–424,423
GPU.SeeGraphicsprocessingunits(GPUs) Gridservicemigration,423–424,424
GPUclusters,83–87 Gridservicemodels,425–427
architecture,86 Gridserviceprotocolstack,417–418,418
capabilities,83 Gridserviceproviders(GSPs),31
components,85 GridServiceReference(GSF),286,423–424,423
CUDAparallelprogramming,86 Gridservices,280,283–287
design,84–85,84 accountingsystemfor,439–440,439
GQL,370 monitoringandmeteringservices,439–440
GRAALProject,166 Gridstandards,44,444
GRAMmodule,448,450 GridWorkloadsArchive(GWA),458
GRAMprotocol,445,447 Grid’5000,244–246,428,429–430,458,459,461,
Graphicsprocessingunits(GPUs),14 563–564
GPUcomputing,17–20,18 Gridbus,440–443
many-core,15 GridbusResourceBroker,442
powerefficiency,19–20 GridChem,295
programmingmodel,17–19 GridFTP,426,447,449,451
workingsof,17 Grids,4
Graphs architecture,416–419
random,493 business,417
scale-free,493 vs.clouds,40,419
small-world,493 ofclusters,369
Gray,Jim,8,21,26 computational,7,30,31,71,417
Greatglobalgrid(GGG),417,417 data,7,31,31
Greencomputing,158 featuresof,336–339
Greendatacenters,224 historyandservicecategories,416–419
Greenpages,304 HPC,419
GridAPIs,444 vs.HPCclusters,417


===== page 656 =====
Index 633
information(knowledge),417 Hierarchy,virtualization,153–154
InterGrid,241 Highavailability(HA),48,66,83,95–99
international,428–430,429 Highavailability(HA)clusters,71
layeredarchitecturefor,37–38,37 Highavailability(HA)systems,456
middlewareapplications,291–294 Highlevellanguage(HLL),132
national,428–430 Highthroughput,6
P2P,31,417 High-bandwidthinterconnects,80–81,80
programmingenvironment,338 High-CPUinstances,382
security,455–470 High-fluxcomputing,6
selfish,457,457 High-leveldataanalysislanguages
semantic,309–312,311,417 comparisonof,366
servicemodelings,416–427 DryadLINQ,361–365
vs.supercomputers,419–422 PigLatin,365–368
toolkits,44 Sawzall,365–368
trustmodelsfor,461–463 High-memoryinstances,381,382
typesof,417 High-performancecomputingandcommunication(HPCC),
virtual,419–422 431
workloadandperformanceprediction,457–461 High-performancecomputing(HPC),4–6,5,8
GridWay,442 applications,9–10
GSI.SeeGlobusSecurityInfrastructure(GSI) CycloneCloudfor,550–551
GT4library,446–449,447,467 MOSIXapplicationsfor,111
datamanagementusing,451–452 performance,561–576
monitoringanddiscovery,452,452 resourcerequirements,169
Guestsystems,157 High-performancevirtualstorage,158–159
Guest-basedmanager,159 High-throughputcomputing(HTC),4,5,6,8,66,192
Gustafson’slaw,47–48 applications,9–10
performance,561–576
H
HimalayaCluster,67
Hadoop,43,43–44,342,343,354,355–359 Histogram
architecture,357–358,357 inDryadLINQ,362
Kmeansclusteringfor,353 ofword-countproblem,363–364
performanceonClueWebdataset,355 Historicalinterval,458,460
runningajobin,358–359,358 Homedirectory,89–90
WebVisCounterprogramimplementation,364–365 Homenode,88
HadoopDistributedFileSystem(HDFS),242,242,355–357 Homogeneity,68–69
Hardware,clustersand,83 Homogenousdesign,77–79
Hardwareabstractionlevelvirtualization,132–134 Honeynets,177
HardwareasaService(HaaS),235 Honeypots,177
Hardwarelayer,88 Hopper,74–75
Hardwarevirtualization,26,221–223 Horizontalscalability,570
Hardware-assistedvirtualization,135–138,148 Hostchanneladapter(HCA),82
Hbase,341 Hostfailure,89
HBMmodule,447,447 Hostnode,88
Healthcareapplications,ofsocialnetworks,606–607 Hostsystems,157
Healthmonitoring,586,586 Host-basedIDS(HIDS),176
Heartbeats,99 Host-basedmanager,159
Heterogeneity,45,68 Host-basedvirtualization,141–143
dynamic,153 Hotstandbyclusters,99
inpeerresources,486 HPC.SeeHigh-performancecomputing(HPC)
Hierarchicalaccessmodel,426,427 HPCgrids,419
Hierarchicalclassification,436 HTC.SeeHigh-throughputcomputing(HTC)
Hierarchicallystructuredoverlaynetworks,501–505,501 HTTP,274,278


===== page 657 =====
634 Index
HUBzero,294,297–301 InfiniBand,22,80,80–81
architecture,298–299,298 architecture,82,82
contenttagging,299 interconnect,120
futuredirections,300–301 Informationconsumption,547
operationalfeatures,299 Informationgrids,417
ratingsandcitations,299 Informationleakage,50
usagemetrics,300 InformationPowerGrid,417
usersupportarea,299–300 Informationservices,284
wikisandblogs,300 InfrastructureasaService(IaaS),35,36,49,200–203,201,
Humanresources(HR),35 224,227,235–236,336,572–574
Hybridaccessmodel,426,427 RFIDand,576
Hybridclouds,194,194,199,217 Infrastructurecloudfeatures,338
Hybridmodel(H-Model),460,460 Infrastructurelayer,ofcloudarchitecture,218,218
Hybridnodedesign,77–78 Infrastructureservices,284
Hypecycle,11,12 Initialreputationaggregation,520
Hypercalls,140,143 INRIAcluster,165,166
Hypervisors,23,134,140–141 Instantmessaging,483
Instructionsetarchitecture(ISA)level,130,131,132
I
Instruction-levelparallelism(ILP),9,14
IaaS.SeeInfrastructureasaService(IaaS) Integratedclusters,159
IBM,228 Integrity,49–51,50
cloudprojects,547–548 Integrityprotection,467
RC2Cloud,548–550 Intelhardware-assistedCPUvirtualization,147–148,148
IBM360,4 IntelPentium4,14
IBMBlueCloud,193,228,238,549,550 Intelx86processor.SeeX86processors
IBMEnsembles,547 Intellectualproperty,50
IBMGridToolbox,44 Interactivejobs,107
IBMRoadrunner,73,119–120 InterCloudarchitecture,247,248
architecture,119 Inter-cloudresourcemanagement,234–249
InfiniBandinterconnect,120 Inter-clouds,40
message-passingperformance,120 Interconnectionnetworks,208–211,214
processorchipandcomputebladedesign, Interconnects,80,80–83
119–120 Interfacedefinitionlanguage(IDL),37
IBMSP2,66,67 Intergidgateway(IGG),241,241
IBMSysplex,66 InterGrid,239,241,244–246
ICECubecontainer,211,211 Inter-moduleconnectionnetworks,213
Identifierspace,496 InternationalElectricotechnicalCommission(IEC),581
Identityauthorities,465 Internationalgrids,428–430,429
Identityspoofingattacks,523 InternationalOrganizationforStandardization(ISO),581
Identity-basedsignatures(IBSes),533 Internet
Illegalfiledownloads,490,531,533 developmentof,416
ILP.SeeInstruction-levelparallelism(ILP) scalablecomputingover,4–13
Imagemanagement,387,388 Internetclouds.SeeClouds
Imagesservice,373 Internetcomputing,4–8
Inactivestate,159 definitionof,7
InChlGoogle,288–289 Internetconferencing,293
Incrementalcheckpoint,102 Internetmicropaymentsystems,11
Independentcheckpointing,104 InternetofThings(IoT),6,11–13
Independentclustermanager,159 applicationsof,590–597,591
Independentscheduling,106 architecture,579,579–580
Independentservicemanagement,244 definitionof,7
Indexservers,482,486,510 developmentof,6,577


===== page 658 =====
Index 635
enablingtechnologiesfor,576–590,578 Jobschedulingmethods,104–106,105
GPSand,587–590 resourcemanagementand,435–437
mobilityandsecuritysupportfor,561,561 selfishgridsand,457
RFIDand,579,580–582 spacesharing,105–106
sensornetworksand,582–587,586 tiling,105,106
technologyroadmapfor,578 timesharing,106
ubiquitouscomputingand,576–580 Job-levelparallelism(JLP),9
InternetProtocolSecurity(IPsec),37 Jointventures,421
InternetSuspend-Resume(ISR),162 JoyentCloud,202
Internettraffic,480,481 JPA.SeeJavaPersistenceAPI(JPA)
Internodecommunication,70 JSR-311(JAX0RS),275
Interoperability,69,226–227,462 JVM.SeeJavaVirtualMachine(JVM)
Intrusiondetectionsystems(IDSes),50,462
distributed,252–253 K
host-based,176 Kmeansclustering,353,354
network-based,176 Kadnetwork,497
VM-based,176–179 Kademlia,499
I/Oaddressspace,single,92,93 KaZaA,482,483,493–494,494,502–503,502,537
I/Onode,88 Kernellayer,88
I/Ovirtualization,150–153,152 Kernellevel,checkpointingat,101–102
IPaddresses,2128,13 Kesselman,Carl,416
IPv6protocol,13 Kimberley,560
IRods,295,309 Kleinberg,Jon,607–608
Isolatedredundancy,98 Klienrock,Leonard,6
ITasaservice,200 Knowledgegrids,417
ITgrowth,29 KhronosGroup,86
IterativeMapReduce,351–355,353,371 KVM(kernel-basedVM),144,146
J L
Jaguar.SeeCrayXT5Jaguar LaboratoryInformationSystems(LIMS),316
Java,37–38 LAMParchitecture,298
JavaDataObject(JDO),370 LanguageIntegratedQuery(LINQ),361–365
JavaMessageService(JMS),37,105,291 Latencyprocessor,84
JavaPersistenceAPI(JPA),370 LDAP(LightweightDirectoryAccessProtocol),38
JavaVirtualMachine(JVM),133 Libraries,checkpointingat,101–102
JavaSpace,313 Librarysupportlevelvirtualization,132,138–140
JBoss,280 LightweightDirectoryAccessProtocol(LDAP),392,430
JBPMproject,280 LimeWire,537
JDO.SeeJavaDataObject(JDO) Lindaprogrammingmodel,313
JLP.SeeJob-levelparallelism(JLP) Linklayer,418
JMS.SeeJavaMessageService(JMS) LinkedEnvironmentsforAtmosphericDiscovery(LEAD),
JNDI(JiniandJavaNamingDirectoryInterface),38 302
Jobexecutionenvironments,312–314 LinkedIn,606
Jobmanagement,70 Linuxclusters,MOSIX2for,41–42,110
Jobmanagementsystems(JMS),93,95,107–109 LinuxOS,72,137
administration,107 LinuxvServer,137
clusterjobtypes,107 Livemigration,159–162,160,165
clusterworkloadcharacteristics,107–108 Loadbalancing,158,202,380,385
featuresof,108–109 Loadindex,457
migrationschemes,108 Loadinformationmanagers(LIMs),109
Jobresponsetime,45 Loadmanagement,107
Jobscheduler,107 Loadsharing,107


===== page 659 =====
636 Index
Loadsharingfacility(LSF),109–110,554 controlflowimplementation,352
applicationof,oncluster,110 dataandcontrolflow,348–351
architecture,109 dataflowimplementation,350
utilitycommands,109–110 definitionof,346
Load-balancingclusters,71 descriptionandfeatures,42,43
Localareanetworks(LANs),21–22,27 formalnotationofdataflow,348
virtual,235 framework,345
Localbridge,602 Hadoopimplementation,355–359,364–365
Localfiles,90 iterative,351–355,353,371
Localjobs,107 logicaldataflow,346–348,347
competitionbetweenclusterjobsand,106 performance,575,576
Localnode,88 problem-solvingstrategy,348
LocalResourceManagementSystem(LRMS),389 scalability,558
Localscheduler,448 MapReduce++,353,369,370,371
Localscheduling,106 Mashups.SeeCloudmashups
Localstorage,90 Massiveparallelism,17,18,19
Localtrustscores,518,520 clusteringfor,66–75
LocationasaService(LaaS),235 GPUclustersfor,83–87
Locationtransparency,88,91 Massivesystems,27,27
Location-awarerequestdistributionalgorithms(LARD), Massivelydistributedsystems,8
312 Massivelyparallelprocessors(MPPs),5,69,369,416,546
Location-basedservice(LBS),587 architecture,75–87
Logisticsservices,592 designissues,69–71
Look-aheadrandomwalk(LRW),520 packaging,77–79
Looselysynchronousapplications,369,371 Masternode,99–100
Low-costdesignphilosophy,25–26 Master-workermodel,349
Lsbatch,109 Matchmaking,312
Lshosts,109 Matrixmultiplication,86
LSLIB(loadsharinglibrary),109 MayaGUI,398
Lsmake,110 MCCluster,67
Lsrun,109 MCAT,309
Lstcsh,109 M/DB,341
Lstools,109 MDCube(ModularizedDatacenterCube),213,214
Lxrun,138,139 MDSmodule,447,450,452
Meansquareerror(MSE),460
M Meantimetofailure(MTTF),48,98,100–101,102
Machinememory,148 Meantimetorepair(MTTR),48,98,100–101
Machinesize,45 Medicalapplications,ofsocialnetworks,606
Magellan,565 Megabitspersecond(Mbps),14
Mainframecomputers,4 Megastations,70
Malware-basedattacks,249,251 Memcache,372
Man-in-the-middleattacks,225,251,255,255 Memex,547
Manjrasoft,205,393–398 Memory
Many-corechipmultiprocessors(CMPs),153,155 machine,148
Many-coreGPUprocessors,15 physical,148
Mapfunction,43,345–346,348 shared,77,369,370
Mapping,344,368–370 virtual,130,148
MapReduce,26,203,312–313,336 Memoryaccesstime,20
architecture,357,357–358 Memorybus,77
benchmarking,574–576 Memorycontrollers(MCs),18,84
comparisonswith,342 Memorymanagementunit(MMU),148
compute-dataaffinity,351 Memorymigration,162


===== page 660 =====
Index 637
Memoryspace,single,92 supportforSSIclustering,94,95
Memorytechnology,20,21 supportforvirtualization,138,138–140
Memoryushering,111,112 virtualization,22–24
Memoryvirtualization,148–150,149–150 Middlewarelayer,88,52,53
Meshaccessmodel,426 Migration
Meshnetworksensors,11 filesystem,162–163
Messagebus,289–290,290 live,ofvirtualmachines,159–162,160,165
Messagefiltering,291 memory,162
Messagenotification,291 network,163–164
Messagepassing,7 usingXen,164–165,165
Messageprotection,466–467 Migrationoverhead,108
Messagequeuing,308 Migrationschemes,108
Message-levelsecurity,467 Millionsofinstructionspersecond(MIPS),14,45
Message-orientedmiddleware,289–294 MIMD(MultipleInstructionMultipleData),368
enterprisebus,289–290,290 MIPS.SeeMillionsofinstructionspersecond(MIPS)
publish-subscribemodel,291 Mobilecloudcomputing,558–561
queuingandmessagingsystems,291,292 Modulardatacenters,211–212,211
Message-passinginterface(MPI),42–43,43,71,208,352, constructionof,211–212
353,371 interconnectionnetworks,212–213
benchmarking,574–576 Modularpackaging,78–79
Kmeansclustering,354 Monadicaccessmodel,426,427
Metadata,304,308–309 Monitoringsystems,313
Metadatacatalogs,308–309 Monolithichypervisorarchitecture,140
MetadataCatalogService(MCS),309 Moore’slaw,8,14,22
METADATAtable,378–379 MOSIX,67,110–112
Metaproblems,369 MOSIX2,41–42,110
Microinstances,381,382 Mosso,548
Microblogging,611–613 MotionPictureAssociationofAmerica(MPAA),533
Micro-kernelarchitecture,140 MPI.SeeMessage-passinginterface(MPI)
Microprocessors,advancesin,14 MPPs.SeeMassivelyparallelprocessors(MPPs)
Microsoft,548,573 MQSeries,290
MicrosoftAzure,193,203,229,233–234,336,548 MTTF.SeeMeantimetofailure(MTTF)
AffinityGroups,340 MTTR.SeeMeantimetorepair(MTTR)
featuresof,385 MuleMQ,291,292
platform,234 Multi-corechips,26
programmingsupport,384–387 MulticoreCPUs,14–16
roles,341 architecture,15,16
serviceofferings,228 schematic,15
SQLAzure,385 virtualizationin,153–154,154
tables,386–387 Multipleconnections,89
virtualizationsupport,224 Multiplexing,24
virtualizedresources,223 MultiplicityofOSimages,46,46
MicrosoftDryad.SeeDryad MultipointControlUnit(MCU),291
MicrosoftSharepoint,205 Multitaskingscalability,569–570
Middleware Multithreading,9
cloudorgridapplications,291–294 Multithreadingtechnologies,14–16,16
clustersand,83 Multitierarchitecture,282,282–283
grid,302,443–455 Multi-wavelength(MWL)detectors,296
message-oriented,289–294 Mutualauthentication,468– 469, 469
inmultitierarchitecture,283 MyGridProject,312
opensource,444–446 Myrinet,80–81,80
support,444–446 MySpace,599


===== page 661 =====
638 Index
N Newtechnologies,hypecycleof,11,12
NanoHUB.orggateway,296–297 NewYorkTimes,205
Nanotechnology,296 Nexus,447,447
Napster,482,482,493,494
Nimbus,172,173,336,387–389,388
NaradaBrokering,291,292–293 NimbusContextBroker,555
NAS.SeeNetworkattachedstorage(NAS) NimbusWeb,387
NASGrid,428 Nimrod-G,442
Nashequilibrium,457 Nodeactiveness,99
NationalAeronauticsandSpaceAdministration(NASA),196,
Nodearchitecture,74,77–79
552–555 Nodeavailability,108
NationalEnergyResearchScientificComputingCenter Nodedegree,601
(NERSC),565 Nodefailures,510
Nationalgridprojects,428–430 Nonrelationaldatabases,341
Nativemode,110 Nonuniformmemoryaccess(NUMA),46
Nebula,552–553,553 NordicD-Grid,429
Nebulae,18,73,74–75 NOSQL,376–379
NEES.org,298 NOSQLnonrelationaldatabases,341,370
.NET,229,417 No-trustsystems,522
Net-centricservices,287–288 Nova,392
NetSuite,548 NOWproject,66,67,75
Networkaddresstranslator(NAT),484 NSFTeraGrid,30,417
NetworkasaService(NaaS),235 NUMA.SeeNonuniformmemoryaccess(NUMA)
Networkattachedstorage(NAS),21,22,163
N-versionprogramming,98–99
Networkbandwidth,8,45,193 NVIDIA,17,18,87
Networkdefensetechnologies,50 NVIDIAFermiGPU,18,19
NetworkFileSystem(NFS),90
O
NetworkforComputationalNanotechnology(NCN),296
Networkinterfacecard(NIC),82 ObjectManagementGroup,444
Networklatency,45 ObservationalMedicalOutcomesPartnership(OMOP),340
Networklayer,52,53–54 OGCEGadgetcontainer,301,303
Networkmigration,163–164 OGSA.SeeOpenGridServicesArchitecture(OGSA)
Networkonchip(NoC),18,84 OGSA-DAI(GlobusDataAccessandIntegration),452
Networkoperatingsystems,40 Onionrouting,488
Networkproximity,487,487,507–509 Onlinepiracy,50,490
Networkthreats,49–51,50 Onlinesocialnetworks(OSNs),546,597–600
Network-basedIDS(NIDS),176 attacktracking,608
Network-basedsystems,technologiesfor,13–26 benefitsof,600
Networking
characteristicsof,597–600
data-center,194–196,195 communitiesandapplicationsof,603–608
single,91,92
Facebook,608–611
Networks
graph-theoreticanalysisof,600–603,601,603
expandabilityof,209 privacybreaches,607
localarea,21,22,27,235 representative,599,599
overlay.SeeOverlaynetworks structureof,598
peer-to-peer(P2P).SeePeer-to-peer(P2P)networks
Twitter,611–613
sensor,582–587 Onlinetransactionprocessing(OLTP),66
social.SeeOnlinesocialnetworks(OSNs) OnStart()method,384
storagearea,21,22,163 OnStop()method,384
structureof,209 OpenCirrus,565
virtualprivatenetwork(VPN),28,433 OpenCloudConsortium(OCC),565
wide-area,22 OpenCloudTestbed,565
Networksofclusters,7 OpenComputingLanguage,86


===== page 662 =====
Index 639
OpenGatewayComputingEnvironments(OGCE)project, security,522–523
294,301–303 structured,490–491,498–501,507,524
gadgetcontainer,303 trustoverlaynetworks,517–519,518
messagingservice,301 unstructured,490,492–496,509,524
packaging,303 OVirt,199
scientificapplicationmanagement,302–303 OWL,310
workflows,302 OWL-Sontology,310
OpenGridForum(OGF),438,444
P
OpenGridServicesArchitecture(OGSA),44,44,280,283,
285,422–424,444 PaaS.SeePlatformasaService(PaaS)
framework,422 Packaging,68
GridServiceHandles(GSHs),423 Packetswitching,83
gridservicemigration,423–424 Pageblobs,385
interfaces,422–423,423 Pan-STARRSworkflow,318–319
securitymodels,424,425 Parallax,171–172,172
SemanticOGSA(S-OGSA),312 Parallelanddistributedprogramming
OpenGridServicesInfrastructure(OGSI),284 advantagesof,343–370
OpenMPIProject,120 definitionof,343
OpenScienceGrid,294,303 Dryad,359–365
OpenSocialstandards,303 DryadLINQ,361–365
OpenSoftwareFoundation(OSF),41 Hadoop,355
Opensourcegridmiddleware,444–446 MapReduce,345–355
OpenSystemsInterconnection(OSI)layers,37 motivationfor,344–345
OpenVirtualizationFormat(OVF),226 paradigms,344–345
OpenBabelservice,288–289 PigLatin,365–368
OpenMP,338 Sawzall,365–368
OpenNebula,173,200,244,389–393,390 Twister,351–355
OpenStack,391–392,392 Parallelanddistributedsystems,mappingapplicationsto,
OpenStackCompute,392–393 368–370
OpenStackStorage,393 Parallelcomputer,7
OpenVZ,136–137,137,299 Parallelcomputing,6
Operate-repaircycle,96 systemclassification,27
Operatingsystemlevelvirtualization,132,135 Paralleldatatransfer,427
Operatingsystems(OSs) Paralleljobs,107
cloud,forvirtualizeddatacenters,172–176 Parallelprocessing,7
cluster,76–77 Parallelprogramming,7
distributed,42–44 inclusters,77
extensions,83 CUDA,86
network,41 models,42–44,43
ofTop500,72–73 withSawzallandPigLatin,367–368
Oracle,308 Parallelprograms,7,103,103
OracleStreamsAdvancedQueuing,308 ParallelVirtualMachine(PVM),43,71,111
OrchestrationandDirectorEngine(ODE),302 Parallelism,8
OSextensions,135–136 SeealsoMassiveparallelism
OSimagecount,46–47,46 bit-level,9
OSCAR3service,288–289 data-level,9,319
OSF.SeeOpenSoftwareFoundation(OSF) degreeofparallelism(DoP),9
Overlaynetworks,32,32–33,492–496 functional,319
complexityanalysis,503–505 instruction-level,9,14
hierarchicallystructured,501–505 job-level,9
networkproximityin,507–509 massive,17,18,19
routingin,505–513 task-level,9


===== page 663 =====
640 Index
Para-virtualization,143–145 searchalgorithms,524–528
architecture,143–144,143 security,522
withcompilersupport,144–145 structured,498–501,524
forI/Ovirtualization,150 taxonomyof,490–492,491
KVM(kernel-basedVM),144 trustandreputationmanagementin,489
VMwareESXServerfor,144–145,145 trustoverlaynetworks,517–519
Partialfailures,97 unstructured,492–496,524
Partitioning,344,348,604 PeerTrust,517,518
Partitioningfunction,349,350 Performance
PartitionKeyproperty,386 benchmarking,574–576
Passwords,464,468–470 bottlenecks,226,242
PASTstorageutility,497 ofclouds,561–576
Pastry,498,508–509 ofdistributedsystems,561–576
Pathlength,601 ofHPC/HTCsystems,568–572
Patterson,David,6 prediction,forgrids,457–461
Pausedstate,160 scalable,46,70
Peakspeed(R ),73 ofTop500,72
peak
PeerAuthorizationProtocol(PAP),534,536 unpredictable,226
Peernodes,searchof,486 Performancemetrics,45–48
Peertrustandreputationsystems,514–517 Peripheralcomponentinterconnect(PCI),82
Peer-to-peer(P2P)computing,456,480–492 Permanentfailures,96–97
basicconcepts,480–485 Personalcomputers(PCs),4
challengesin,486–490 PetriNets,316
Peer-to-peer(P2P)grids,31,417 P-Grid,497
Peer-to-peer(P2P)networks,5,8,27,28,32,32,417, PharmaHUB.org,300
480–492 Physicalclusters
applications,33,483,483–485 definitionof,155
architecture,32 vs.virtualclusters,156–159,156
challenges,33–34 Physicalmemory,148
characteristicsof,480 PigLatin,365–368,366–367
vs.client/servernetworks,482,482 Piracy,50
complexityanalysis,503–505,504 Piracyprevention,490,535–538
contentdeliverynetworks,529–532 Piratedownloadtime,536–538
copyrightprotectionand,533–534 Piratesuccessrate,536–538
DHTimplementation,519–520,519 PitneyBowes,206
fordistributedfilesharing,493–496 PKI-basedtrustmodel,462,464–465,464
distributedhashtables(DHTs),496–497 Plannedshutdowns,96,98
effectivesearchin,486 PlatformAbstractionLayer(PAL),396
examplesof,483–484 PlatformasaService(PaaS),35,36,49,200,201,203–206,
failurerecovery,509–511 204,227,235–236,336,573
faulttolerance,509–511 Platformevolution,4–5
filesharing,523–538 Platformlayer,ofcloudarchitecture,218,218
free-ridingproblemin,488 Platforms,483
hierarchicallystructured,501–505 Pleasinglyparallelapplications,369
models,482–483,482 Plumtree,513
networkproximityin,507–509 Pods,210
overlaynetworks,32–33,492–505 Policyauthorities,465
peertrustandreputationsystems,514–517,518,520–522 Popularity-drivenresourceprovisioning,238–239,240
performance,34 Portals,294–303,338
piracypreventionin,535–538 PortTypes,284
proximityaware,487 POST,274
routingin,505–507 PostgreSQL,307


===== page 664 =====
Index 641
Powerconsumption,21,224 Q
Powerefficiency Quadrics,80,80–81
ofCPU,19–20 QuakeSim,293–294
ofGPU,19–20
Qualityofcloudservice(QoCS),572,574
Powermanagement,585–586 QualityofService(QoS),196,221,247–248,487
PowerTrust,517,518,520,520–522
Queuing,291
Presentationlayer,282 Queuingservices,341
Prestige,602 Queuingsystems,292
Primarycomponents,98 Queuingtime,436
Privacy,252,339,341,607
Privacyprotection,255–256 R
Privateclouds,193–194,194,196–200,552–555
Rackspace,548
Privatekeygenerator(PKG),533 RackspaceCloud,202
Privatekeys,464,469 Radiality,602
Privateregistries,304 Radio-frequencyidentification(RFID),6,11,576,580–582,581
Privilegedinstructions,147 Randomgraphs,493
Proactivecontentpoisoning,535,535 Randomwalkalgorithms,525
Problemsizescalability,45 Randomizedcolluderdetection,535–536,536
Processspace,93 Rappturetoolkit,299
Processingdaemon,360 Rarestfirst(RF),526
Process-levelvirtualization,132 RC2.SeeResearchComputeCloud(RC2)
Processorspeed,8,14,14,45 RDF.SeeResourceDescriptionFramework(RDF)
Producer/consumermodel,437,437–438
Reach,601
Productiongrids,444 Read-onlyRFIDtags,580
Professionalnetworking,606 Read-writeRFIDtags,581
Programlibrary,340 RecordIndustryAssociationofAmerica(RIAA),533
ProgrammableWeb.com,306 Recovery,70–71,83,100–101
Programmingmodels Recoverytime,99
AmazonWebServices(AWS),379–387
Recruitmentthreshold,108
cloud,343 Reducefunction,43,345–347,349,351,365
GoogleAppEngine(GAE),370–379 Redundancy,70–71,95–99
MicrosoftAzure,384–387
isolated,98
parallelanddistributed,42–44,343–370
techniques,98
Proximityneighborselection,509 Registries
Proximityrouting,508–509
categoriesofinformationin,304
Proximitysubgroups,508 private,304
Proxycertificates,466,468–469
public,304
Proxycredentials,464–465 serviceregistries,304–306
Publicclouds,193,194,199 shared(semiprivate),304
providers,202–203 UDDI,304–306
serviceofferings,227–229,228
Regularrandomwalk,520
virtualizationsupportin,224 RelationalDatabaseService(RDS),232,379
PublicKeyInfrastructure(PKI),252,424,464–465,561 Relationaldatabases,340–341
Publickeys,464,468–469 Reliability,8,10,98–99
Publicregistries,304 Reliability,availability,andserviceability(RAS),95–96
PublisherAssertion,305 Remoteexecutionserver(RES),109
Publish-subscribemodel,291,307–308,308,312
Remotefiles,90
PubMed,288–289
RemoteMethodInvocation(RMI),38
PUT,274 Remotenodes,88
Putoperation,497 RemoteProcedureCall(RPC),37
PVM.SeeParallelVirtualMachine(PVM) Remotestorage,90
Python,370 Replayprevention,467


===== page 665 =====
642 Index
ReplicaLocationService(RLS),309 Ringsidesocialapplicationservers,610
Replication,528 RISCprocessors,15
RepresentationalStateTransfer(REST),273,273–277 RLS(ReplicaLocationService),452
architecture,275 Roadrunner.SeeIBMRoadrunner
principlesof,273 Roboticgardenproject,596–597
queuingservicesand,341 Rollbackrecovery,70,100
Reputationmanagement,inP2Pnetworks,489 Rootdirectories,137
Reputationsharing,227 Rootkits,251
Reputationsystems,257–260,456,456 Routing,inP2Pnetworks,505–507
forclouds,258–259 Routingefficiency,487
designoptions,257–258,258 RowKeyproperty,386
inP2Pnetworks,514,518,520 Run()method,384
trustoverlaynetworks,259–260,260 RunJob(conf)function,358
Reputationvector,520 Runtimeenvironment,451
Reputation-basedtrustmodel,257–260,462–463 Runtimesupportservices,237
Researchclouds,562–566
ResearchComputeCloud(RC2),194–196 S
Researchgrids,444 SaaS.SeeSoftwareasaService(SaaS)
ResourceDescriptionFramework(RDF),310 SAGA(SimpleAPIforGridApplications),444
Resourcelayer,52,53,419 Salesforce.com,205,228,229,548,552
Resourcemanagement SAMLprotocol,466
SeealsoGridresourcemanagement SAN.SeeStorageareanetworks(SANs)
inter-cloud,234–249 Savitsky-Golayfilter,460
optimizationof,170 Sawzall,365–366,365–368
services,284 SAXPY,86
virtualclustersand,155–169 Saxpy_serialroutine,86
Resourcemanagementlayer,282,283 Scalability,8,10,68,176,558
Resourcemanagementsystem(RMS),388,435–437,435 application,45
Resourcemanager,107 cloud,226–227
Resourcemonitoring,437,437 dimensionsof,45
Resourceprovisioning,237–243,238 horizontal,570
ofcomputeresources,237–238 multitasking,569–570
demand-driven,239,240 vs.OSimagecount,46,46–47
dynamic,239–241 ofP2Pnetworks,481,486
event-driven,238–239,240 size,45
methods,238–239 software,45
popularity-driven,238–239,240 vertical,570
ofstorageresources,242–243 Scalablecoherenceinterface(SCI),77
underprovisioning,238 Scalablecomputing,4–13
Resourcesharing,7,77,78 Scalableparallelcomputingenvironments,338
Resource-pullingmodel,465,465 Scalableperformance,46,70
REST.SeeRepresentationalStateTransfer(REST) Scaled-workloadspeedup,47
RESTsystems,38 Scale-freegraphs,493
RESTfulWebservices Scheduling,344
inAmazonS3,275–276 Scienceandresearchclouds,562–566
interactionwith,274 ScienceClouds,566
Web2.0applicationsand,276 Sciencegateways,294,294–303,338
Restlet,275 exemplars,295–297
Retailing,IoTand,591–594 HUBzero,297–301
RFID.SeeRadio-frequencyidentification(RFID) OpenGatewayComputingEnvironments(OGCE)project,
RFIDtags,580–582 301–303
RFT(ReliableFileTransfer),448,451 Scratchspace,91


===== page 666 =====
Index 643
SDKs(softwaredevelopmentkits),419 Serviceaccounting,439–440
SeagateBarracudaXT,20,21 Serviceavailability,225
Searchalgorithms,524–528 Servicecomputing,7
Sector/Sphere,336,390–391,391 Servicegrounding,310
SecureOverlayServices(SOS),523 Servicemodels,310
SecureShell(SSH),245 IaaS,200–203
SecureSocketsLayer(SSL),468 PaaS,200,203–205,204
Security,176 SaaS,200,205–206
authentication,464–465,468–469 Servicenodes,77
authorizationmethods,464–465 Serviceprofile,310
cloud,225,249–260,339,561 Serviceregistries,304–306
cluster,69 Serviceability,95
GlobusSecurityInfrastructure(GSI),466–470 Service-levelagreements(SLAs),10,193,200,229,237,248,558
grid,455,461–463 Service-orientedarchitecture(SOA),26,37–40,216,
infrastructure,50–51 271–322,422
InternetProtocolSecurity(IPsec),37 characteristicsof,272
message-level,467 discovery,registries,metadata,anddatabases,304–314
networkthreatsanddataintegrity,49–51 DoDnet-centricservices,287–288
OGSAsecuritymodel,424,425 enterprisemultitierarchitecture,282–283
P2Pnetworks,489,522–523 evolutionof,39,39–40
piracyprevention,535–538 layeredarchitectureforWebservicesandgrids,37,37–38
responsibilities,49 REST,273–277
services,284 sciencegateways,294–303
transport-level,467,469 servicesand,272–289
trustmodels,461–463 Webservicesand,38,277–281
trustedzones,177–179 workflowin,314–322
VM-basedintrusiondetectionsystems,176–179 Services
SecurityasaService(SaaS),235,260 CICC,288–289
Securitydemand(SD),462–463 discovery,304
Securityindex,571 grid,279,283–287
Securityresilience,45 net-centric,287–288
SEG(SchedulerEventGenerator),448 OGSA,284
Selfishgrids,457 queuing,341
Self-managementservices,285 RESTfulWebservices,273–277
Self-organization,481 Web.SeeWebservices
Semanticgrids,309–312,311,417 ServiceTypes,284
SemanticOGSA(S-OGSA),312 SessionInitiationProtocol(SIP),483
SemanticWeb,309–312,417 SETI@Home,30,87,419,429,485,492
Semiprivateregistries,304 SGE.SeeSunGridEngine(SGE)
Sensornetworks,582–586 SGICyclone,550–552,551
Sensorservice(SS),39 SGIOrigin3000,66
Sensortechnologies,6 SGIProPack5,72
Sequentialbottleneck,47 Shadowpagetable,150
SERENDIP,485 Sharedmemory,77,78,369,369
Serialjobs,107 Sharedregistries,304
Serverclusters,194–195 Shared-diskarchitecture,77,78
Serverconsolidation,169–170 Signaturematching,253
Servernodes,109 SIMD(singleinstruction,multipledata),9,368,369
Server-centricdesign,210,212–213 Simon,Herbert,547
Servers SimpleCloudAPIs,341
energyconsumptionofunused,51 SimpleNetworkManagementProtocol(SNMP),92
underutilizationof,170 SimpleNotificationService(SNS),379


===== page 667 =====
644 Index
SimpleObjectAccessProtocol(SOAP),38,278–281,382,466 Softwarestacks,forcloudcomputing,236
SimpleQueueService(SQS),379 Solid-statedrives(SSDs),20
SimpleStorageService.SeeAmazonS3(SimpleStorageService) SourceForge.net,297,303
SimpleDB,336,379,383–384 SP2ServerCluster,67,98
SimpleGridproject,294 Space,45
Simultaneousmultithreaded(SMT)processor,16 Spacesharing,105–106
SingleCloudFileStorageAPI,340 Specialfunctionunits(SFUs),18
Singleentrypoint,89 Speedperformance,5,72
Singlefilehierarchy,90 Speedupfactor,47
Singleinstruction,multipledata(SIMD),71 Sphere,336,390–391
Singlememoryspace,92,92 SPMD(single-programandmultipledata),368
Singlenetworking,91–93,92 SPRESIservices,288–289
Singlepointofcontrol,88,92,92 Spyware,251
Singlepointoffailure,48,97,97 SQL,340–341
Singlepointofmanagement,92 SQLDataServices(SDS),386
Single-chipcloudcomputer(SCC),87 SQLqueries,313
Single-precision(SP)arithmetic,83 SQLAzure,385
Single-systemimage(SSI),29,41,70 SSDs.SeeSolid-statedrives(SSDs)
features,87–95 SSI.SeeSingle-systemimage(SSI)
inMOSIX2,110–111 Stablestorage,90
Sizescalability,45 Standardinstances,381,382
Skip-list-basedsystems,498 Standardization,226–227,257,278
SkipNet,504,505 Statelessinteractions,274
SkyComputing,566 Staticmode,104
Skype,483–484 Staticpriority,104
Slackclusters,68 Staticreplication,425
SLEs10,72 Stayscheme,106
SloanDigitalSkySurvey,567 Storage
Small-worldgraphs,493 Azure,384–387
Smartbuildings,594 cloud,340
Smartpowergrids,594,595 distributed,226
SMP.SeeSymmetricmultiprocessor(SMP) local,90
Snapshots,103–104 provisioningof,242–243,242
SOA.SeeService-orientedarchitecture(SOA) remote,90
SOAP.SeeSimpleObjectAccessProtocol(SOAP) stable,90
SOAPmessages,280,280 virtual,171–172
SOAP-basedWebservices,277–282 Storageareanetworks(SANs),21,22,163
Socialcircles/clusters,602 StorageResourceBroker(SRB),309
Socialengine,610 Storagetechnology,20
Socialnetworkanalysis,600–603 Storagevirtualization,171–172,224
Socialnetworks.SeeOnlinesocialnetworks(OSNs) Stormbotnet,497
Software Streamingmultiprocessors(SMs),18,84
clustersand,83 Streamingprocessors(SPs),18,19
forgridcomputing,443–455 Stripeddatatransfer,427
licensing,227 Structuralcohesion,602–603
support,444–446 Structuralequivalence,602
virtualization,221 Structuralholes,602
SoftwareasaService(SaaS),35,36,49,192,200,205–206, Structuredoverlaynetworks,33,490–491,498,498–501,502–503
227,229,235,343,572,574 hierarchical,501–505
Softwarebugs,226 networkproximityin,507–509
Softwarelayer,forvirtualization,130 searchalgorithms,524–528
Softwarescalability,45 Subgrids,314


===== page 668 =====
Index 645
Subject-pushmodel,465,465 Tera-floating-pointoperationspersecond(Tflops/second),485
SubmitJob()function,358 TeraGrid,30,301,303,428,430–431,432
Subscription,305 TeraGridScienceGateway,295
SunGridEngine(SGE),440,444,446 TerraDir,504,505
SunNiagara2,14 Tesla,17
SunOne,417 TeslaGPU,18,87
Supernodes,502–503,510 Tflops(terafloating-pointoperationspersecond),45
Supercomputers,5 Third-partyapplications,244
SeealsoTop500computersystems Throughputperwatt,8
casestudies,112–120 Tianhe-1A,18,73,74–75,78,112–116
datacentersand,195 ARCHfat-treeinterconnect,113
vs.DISCsystems,567,568 architecture,112,113
topfivein2010,73,74 hardwareimplementation,112–114
virtual,416,419–422 LinpackBenchmarkresults,115–116
Superscalarprocessor,15 plannedapplications,115–116
Supplychainmanagement,592–594,593 powerconsumption,space,andcost,115
Suspendedstate,159 softwarestack,115,115
Sustainedspeed(R ),73 Tiling,105–106, 105
max
Swarm-baseddeliverymethods,532 Time,45
Swiftworkflowsystem,321–322,322 Timesharing,106
Switch-centricdesign,210–211 Tit-for-tat(TFT),526
Symmetricmultiprocessor(SMP),46,144 TivoliProvisioningManager,550
Symmetry,88,91 TivoliServiceAutomationManager(TSAM),547
Synchronization,344,349 TLP.SeeTask-levelparallelism(TLP)
Synchronousapplications,369 TModel,305
Synergistictechnologies,577–579,578 Top500computersystems,5,66
Systemavailability,45,48,49,570–571 analysisof,71–75
Systemdefensetechnologies,50 applicationshare,74
Systemdirectories,90 ARCHfat-treeinterconnect,114
Systemefficiency,47,73,570 architecturalevolution,71–72,72
Systemofsystems,40 casestudies,112–120
Systemthroughput,45,569–570 clusterarchitecture,28
System-areainterconnects,21,22 countryshare,74
Systemsofsystems,273–277 CrayXT5Jaguar,116–119
IBMRoadrunner,119–120
T
operatingsystems,72
Table-lookupsearch,506,506–507 performance,72–73
Tables,341 powerversusperformance,75,75
Azure,386–387 shareofsysteminterconnectsin,81–83,81
finger,499,506 Tianhe-1A,112
Tabletlocationhierarchy,378–379,378 topfivein2010,73,74–75
Targetchanneladapter(TCA),82 Topic-basedsystems,307
Task-levelparallelism(TLP),9,14 Totalexecutiontime,569
Taverna,318,319 Totalfailures,97
Tcsh,109 ToxTreeservice,288–289
Technologies TPS(transactionspersecond),45
convergenceof,26 Transactionservers,533
fusion,456–457 Transientfailures,96
hypecycleofnew,11,12 Translationlookasidebuffer(TLB),148
scalability,45–48 Transparency
Telnetcommand,29 location,88,91
TemplateVMs,157–158,244–245 inprogrammingenvironments,42,42


===== page 669 =====
646 Index
Transport-levelsecurity(TLS),466–467,469 Unstructuredoverlaynetworks,33,73,509
TreadMarks,67 URLFetchoperation,372
Tree-baseddeliverymethods,532 Userauthentication,373
Tree-structuresystems,498 UserDatagramProtocol(UDP),390
Trident,337 Userinterface,77,93
Trojanhorses,251 Userserver,107
Trustdelegation,469–470,470 User-applicationlevelvirtualization,132–133
Trustdelegationchain,465 User-definedtype(UDT),390
Trustindex(TI),462–463 User-directedcheckpointing,103
Trustmanagement Usernames,468–469
clouds,249–260 User-orientedreputationsystems,258
inP2Pnetworks,489,514–523 User-space(US)protocol,98
invirtualizeddatacenters,176–179 Utilitycomputing,7,10–11,26
Trustmatrix,515–516 UUHash,502
Trustmodels,461–463
V
fuzzy,463
generalizedmodel,462,463 Varunadatabaseservice,288–289
PKI-based,464–465 VAXSeries,4
reputation-based,257–260,463 VAXcluster,67
Trustoverlaynetworks(TONs),259–260,260,517–519,518 VCenter,174
Trustedzones,177–179,178 VCompute,175
Tsubame,18,75 VCUDA,138–139
TSUBAME2.0,73,74 VCuda,139–140
Tuecke,Steve,416 Vectormachines,9
Twister,342,343,351–355,353–355 Venus-C,566
Twitter,480,597,599,611–613,612 Verticalscalability,570
Two-coreCMP,15 VIOLINcluster,165,166,167–169
Virtualappliances,23,398
U
Virtualclusters
Ubiquitouscomputing,546–561 applicationpartitioningand,157
cloudsfor,546–561 cloudcomputingand,194
definitionof,546 dynamicdeploymentof,165–169
InternetofThingsand,576–590 fastdeploymentandeffectivescheduling,158
wirelesssensornetworksand,582 managementof,159
UDDI(UniversalDescription,Discovery,andIntegration),38, migrationofmemory,files,andnetworkresources,
304–306,305 162–165
UDDICustodyandOwnershipTransferAPI,306 vs.physicalclusters,156,156–159
UDDIInquiryAPI,306 resourcemanagementand,155–169
UDDIPublisherAPI,306 trustedzonesfor,177–179
UDDIReplicationAPI,306 Virtualdiskimages(VDIs),172
UDDISecurityAPI,306 Virtualexecutionenvironment(VE),135
UDDISubscriptionAPI,306 Virtualgrids,419
UltraScanBiophysicsGateway,295–296 Virtualhierarchies,153–154
UNICORE,444 Virtualinfrastructures,24
Unifiednamespace,425–426 Virtualinfrastructures(VI)managers,172,173,199
UniformResourceIdentifiers(URIs),273,275 Virtualinstructionsetarchitecture(V-ISA),132
Uninterruptiblepowersupply(UPS),25 VirtualLANs,235
UniversalBusinessRegistry,306 Virtualmachinemonitor(VMM),23,130,131,237,244
UniversalDescription,Discovery,andIntegration(UDDI), binarytranslationusing,142
278 comparisonof,134
UNIXsemantics,91 designrequirementsandproviders,133–135
Unplannedfailures,96 trustmanagementand,176–179


===== page 670 =====
Index 647
Virtualmachine(VM)managers,243,244 structures/toolsandmechanisms,140–145
Virtualmachines(VMs),22–24,130 VMMdesignrequirementsandproviders,133–135
architectures,23 Virtualizationlayer,130
bare-metal,23 Virtualizationmiddleware,22–24
cloning,224–225 Virtualizationsoftware,221
cloudcomputingand,193,222 Virtualizeddatacenters
deployment,158 automation,169–179
initializationof,156 cloudOSesfor,172–176
managementof,243–246 serverconsolidation,169–170
migration,159–162,160–161 storagemanagement,171–172
ParallelVirtualMachine(PVM),43 trustmanagementin,176–179
performanceeffects,159–162 Virtualizingintegrationmanagers,223
primitiveoperations,23–24,24 Viruses,49
provisioningof,237–243 VisualMainWin,138,139
provisioningof,tovirtualclusters,156 VisualStudio,386
states,159 VLIW(verylonginstructionword)architectures,9
storage,171 VLSImicroprocessors,4
synthesis,560 VMimagemanagement,387,388
template,157–158,244–245 VMOrchestrator,199
Virtualmemory,130,148 VMApp,153
VirtualNetworkComputing(VNC),298 VMDriver,152
Virtualorganizations(VOs),30,338,416,420–422,421 VMNet,153
Virtualplatforms,30 VMwareESXServer,144–145,145,156
VirtualPrivateCloud(VPC),201–203,202 VMwarevSphere4,173,174–176
Virtualprivatenetworks(VPNs),28,433 VMwareWorkstation,146,152–153,174
VirtualProcessorID(VPID),149 VNetwork,175
Virtualreality(VR)applications,13 VoiceoverIP(VoIP),483
Virtualrootdirectories,137 VOTables,288–289
Virtualstorage,158–159 VSphere4,173,174–176,199
managementof,171–172 VStorage,175
Virtualsupercomputers,416,419–420 VT-itechnique,146
Virtualization,6 VT-xtechnique,146
binarytranslationwithfull,141–143
cloudarchitectureand,221–225 W
cloudsecurityand,251 WABI.SeeWindowsApplicationBinaryInterface(WABI)
CPU,147–148 Wal-Martdatawarehouse,567
datacenter,25–26 Warps,18
fordata-centerautomation,169–179 Watermarking,256,256–257,531
hardware-assisted,145,148 Web2.0services,5,6,26
hardware-level,132–133 WebApplicationDescriptionLanguage(WADL),274
host-based,141–143 Webpages,242
forIaaS,224 Webroles,341–342,384
implementationlevelsof,130–140,131,133 WebServiceChoreographyDescriptionLanguage(WS-CDL),
I/O,150–153,152 317
onLinuxorWindowsplatforms,137–138 WebServiceChoreographyInterface(WSCI),317
memory,148–150,149–150 Webservicecore,451
middlewaresupportfor,138,138–140 Webservices,277,422
inmulticoreprocessors,153–154,154 application-specific,301
atOSlevel,135–138 definitionof,277
para-virtualization,143–145 layeredarchitecturefor,37–38,37
inpublicclouds,224 multitierarchitecture,282–283
storage,224 RESTful,273–277


===== page 671 =====
648 Index
Webservices(Cont.) onGrid’5000,459,461
SOAP-based,278 H-Modelfor,460
standardization,278 Workstations,availability,98
toolsand,38 WorldWideWebConsortium(W3C),272
WS-*standards,281–282 WorldWideWeb(WWW),417
WS-Iprotocolstack,278–281 WorldGrid,429
WebServicesAtomicTransaction(WS-AtomicTransaction), Worms,251
317 Write-once-read-many(WORM)tags,581
WebServicesCompositeApplicationFramework WScontainers,451
(WS-CAF),317 WSmashups,26
WebServicesContext(WS-CTX),317 WS-*standards,281
WebServicesConversationLanguage(WSCL),317 WS-Addressing,286
WebServicesCoordination(WS-Coordination),317 WS-BusinessActivity,317
WebServicesDescriptionLanguage(WSDL),37,277–278,286 WSDL.SeeWebServicesDescriptionLanguage(WSDL)
WebServicesFlowLanguage(WSFL),317 WS-Eventing,291
WebServicesReliableMessaging(WSRM),37 WS-Iprotocolstack,278–281,279
WebServicesResourceFramework(WSRF),286,286,451 WS-Notification(WSN),286,291
Webtraffic,480 WSRE(WebServiceResourceFramework),444
WebMDSservice,452 WS-RM(ReliableMessaging),281
WebSphere,417 WS-SecureConversation,466–467
WebSphereCloudBurst,547 WS-Security,466–467,469
WebSphereMQ,290,292 WS-Trust,466,469
WebVisCounterprogram,364–365,364
Whitepages,304 X
Wide-areanetworking(WAN),22,27
X.509certificates,252,468
Windows,virtualizationon,137–138
X.509standard,466,468
WindowsApplicationBinaryInterface(WABI),138–139,138
X86processors,15,25,66,146
WindowsAzure.SeeMicrosoftAzure
XBaya,301
Wine,138,139 Xen,140–141,141,146,164–165,238,244
Wirelesshomeareanetwork(WHAN),582
XenServer,156
Wirelesspersonalareanetwork(WPAN),584
XeonX5670,17
Wirelesssensorapplications,591
Xing.com,606
Wirelesssensornetworks(WSNs),582,584
XLANG,317
Workerroles,341–342,384
XML,278–279
WorkflowManagementCoalition,316
XMLschemas,38
Workflows
XRegistry,301
architectureandspecification,317–319
basicconcepts,315–316
Y
cloudsand,337
executionengine,319–321 YaCy,497
Yahoo!Pipes,252
gridsand,338
inSOA,314–322 Yellowpages,304
specification,318–319 YouTube,480,599
standards,316,317
Swiftworkflowsystem,321–322,322 Z
Workloadmanagement,107 ZigBeecoordinator,584
Workloadprediction ZigBeeenddevice,584
adaptive,458,458–459 ZigBeenetworks,582–587,585
adaptivehybridmodel(AH-Model),460 ZigBeerouter,584
auto-regression(AR)method,459,461 ZoleraSoapInfrastructure(ZSI),280
forgridcomputing,457–461 Zukerberg,Mark,611
