source: Books - all\DistributedSystems_Concepts&Design_Kindberg.pdf
method: pdf
sha256: 344831445ddb68b16909969a4597cb8100bea220a303757c5ef77e4173545585
pages:  1067
ocr:    2 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    300
----------------------------------------------------------------------
===== page 401 =====
SECTION 9.1 INTRODUCTION 383
Figure 9.1 Web services infrastructure and components
Applications
Directory service Security Choreography
Web Services Service descriptions (in WSDL)
SOAP
URIs (URLs or URNs) XML HTTP, SMTP or other transport
in XML. SOAP is used to encapsulate these messages and transmit them over HTTP or
another protocol, for example, TCP or SMTP. A web service deploys service
descriptions to specify the interface and other aspects of the service for the benefit of
potential clients.
The top layer of the figure illustrates the following:
(cid:129) Web services and applications may be built on top of other web services.
(cid:129) Some particular web services provide general functionality required for the
operation of a large number of other web services. They include directory
services, security and choreography, all of which are discussed later in this
chapter.
A web service generally provides a service description, which includes an interface
definition and other information, such as the server’s URL. This is used as the basis for
a common understanding between client and server as to the service on offer. Section
9.3 presents the Web Services Description Language (WSDL).
Another common need in middleware is for a naming or directory service to allow
clients to find out about services. Clients of web services have similar needs, but
frequently manage without directory services. For example, they often find out about
services from information on a web page (say, as the result of a Google search).
However, some work has been done to provide a directory service that is suitable for use
within organizations. This is discussed in Section 9.4.
XML security is introduced in Section 9.5. In this approach to security, documents
or parts of documents may be signed or encrypted. A document that has signed or
encrypted elements may then be transmitted or stored; later additions may be made and
these too may be signed or encrypted.
Web services provide access to resources for remote clients, but they do not
provide a means for coordinating their operations with one another. Section 9.7.3
discusses choreography of web services, which is intended to allow one web service to
use predefined patterns of access in using a set of other web services.
The last section of this chapter considersapplications of web services, including
support for service-oriented architecture, the Grid and cloud computing.


===== page 402 =====
384 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
9.2 Web services
A web service interface generally consists of a collection of operations that can be used
by a client over the Internet. The operations in a web service may be provided by a
variety of different resources, for example, programs, objects or databases. A web
service may be managed by a web server along with web pages; or it may be a totally
separate service.
The key characteristic of most web services is that they can process XML-
formatted SOAP messages (see Section 9.2.1). An alternative is the REST approach
which is outlined in the box on page 386. Each web service uses its own service
description to deal with the service-specific characteristics of the messages it receives.
For a good account of many more-detailed aspects of web services, see Newcomer
[2002] or Alonso et al. [2004].
Many well-known commercial web servers including Amazon, Yahoo, Google
and eBay, offer web service interfaces that allow clients to manipulate their web
resources. As an example, the web service offered by Amazon.com provides operations
to allow clients to get information about products, to add an item to a shopping cart or
to check the status of a transaction. The Amazon web services [associates.amazon.com]
may be accessed either by SOAP or by REST. This enables third-party applications to
build value-added services over those provided by Amazon.com. For example, an
inventory control and purchasing application might order supplies of various
commodities as they are needed from Amazon.com and automatically keep track of the
changing status of each order. Over 50,000 developers registered to use these web
services in the first two years after they were introduced [Greenfield and Dornan 2004].
Another interesting example of an application that requires the presence of a web
service is one that implements ‘sniping’ in eBay auctions – that is, placing a bid during
the last few seconds before an auction closes. Although humans can perform the same
actions by direct interaction with the web page, they cannot do it as quickly.
Combination of web services • Providing an interface for a web service allows its
operations to be combined with those of other services to provide new functionality (see
also Section 9.7.1). The purchasing application mentioned above might be using other
suppliers as well. As another example of the benefits of combining several services,
consider the fact that many people book flights, hotels and rental cars for trips online
using a variety of different web sites. If each of these web sites were to provide a
standard web service interface, then a ‘travel agent service’ could use their operations
to provide a traveller with a combination of these services. This point is illustrated in
Figure 9.2.
Communication patterns • The travel agent service illustrates the possible use of the two
alternative communication patterns available in web services:
(cid:129) The processing of a booking takes a long time to complete and could well be
supported by an asynchronous exchange of documents, starting with the details of
the dates and destinations, followed by a return of status information from time to
time and eventually the details of completion. Performance is not an issue here.


===== page 403 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 385
Figure 9.2 The ‘travel agent service’ combines other web services
flight booking
a
flight booking
b
Travel Agent
Client
Service
hire car bookinga
hire car bookingb
hotel bookinga hotel bookingb
(cid:129) The checking of credit card details and the interactions with the client should be
supported by a request-reply protocol.
In general, web services either use a synchronous request-reply pattern of
communicationwith their clients or communicate by means of asynchronous messages.
The latter style of communication may be used even when requests require replies, in
which case the client sends a request and then later receives the reply asynchronously.
An event-style pattern can also be used: for example, clients of a directory service may
register for events of interest and will be notified whenever certain events (such as the
arrival or departure of a service) occur.
To allow for a variety of patterns of communication, the SOAP protocol
(discussed in Section 9.2.1) is based on the packaging of single one-way messages. Its
supports request-reply interactions by using pairs of single messages and specifying
how to represent operations, their arguments and their results.
More generally, web services are designed to support distributed computing in the
Internet, in which many different programming languages and paradigms coexist.
Hence, they are designed to be independent of any particular programming paradigm.
This is in contrast to, for example, distributed objects which advocate a rather specific
programming paradigm for developers (further discussion of the distinctions between
web services and distributed objects can be found in Section 9.2.2).
Loose coupling • There is considerable interest in loose coupling in distributed systems,
particularly in the web services community. The terminology is often ill-defined and
imprecise, though. In the context of web services, loose coupling refers to minimizing
the dependencies between services in order to have a flexible underlying architecture
(reducing the risk that a change in one service will have a knock-on effect on other
services). This is partially supported by the intended independence of web services with
the subsequent intention to produce combinations of web services as discussed above.
Loose coupling is, however, further enhanced by a number of additional features:
(cid:129) Programming with interfaces (as discussed in Chapter 5) provides one level of
loose coupling by separating the interface from its implementation (and also
supports important areas of heterogeneity, – for example in the choice of
programming language and platform used). Programming with interfaces is


===== page 404 =====
386 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
adopted by most distributed systems paradigms including distributed objects and
components (discussed in Chapter 8) as well as web services.
(cid:129) There is a trend towards simple, generic interfaces in distributed systems and this
is exemplified by the minimal interface offered by the World Wide Web and the
REST approach in web services. This approach contributes to loose coupling by
reducing dependency on specific operation names (the Google case study in
Chapter 21 provides a further example of this style of distributed programming).
One consequence of this is that data becomes more important than operation, with
the semantics of interoperation often held in the data (for example, the associated
XML document definition in web services); this data-oriented view is discussed
further in the context of mobile systems Section 19.3.2.
(cid:129) Asmentioned above, web services can be used with a variety of communication
paradigms, including request-reply communication, asynchronous messaging or
indeed indirect communication paradigms (as featured in Chapter 6). The level of
coupling is directly affected by this choice. For example, in request-reply
communication, the two parties are intrinsically coupled; asynchronous
messaging offers a degree of decoupling (referred to as synchronization
uncoupling in Chapter 6), whereas indirect communication also offers time and
space uncoupling.
In conclusion, there are a number of dimensions to loose coupling, and it is important to
bear this in mind when using the term. Web services intrinsically support a level of loose
coupling due to the design philosophy adopted and the programming with interfaces
approach used. This can be further enhanced by additional design choices, including the
adoption of the REST approach and the use of indirect communication.
Representation of messages • Both SOAP and the data it carries are represented in
XML, a textual self-describing format introduced in Section 4.3.3. Textual
representations take up more space than binary ones and the parsing that they require
takes more time to process. In document-style interactions speed is not an issue, but it is
important in request-reply interactions. However, it is argued that there is an advantage
in a human-readable format that allows for the easy construction of simple messages and
for debugging of more complex ones.
Each item in an XML description is annotated with its type and the meaning of
each type is defined by a schema referenced within the description. This makes the
REST (Representational State Transfer) • REST [Fielding 2000] is an approach with
a very constrained style of operation, in which clients use URLs and the HTTP
operations GET, PUT, DELETE and POST to manipulate resources that are
represented in XML. The emphasis is on the manipulation of data resources rather
than on interfaces. When a new resource is created, it has a new URL by which it can
be accessed or updated. Clients are supplied with the entire state of a resource instead
of calling an operation to get some part of it. Fielding argues that in the context of the
Internet, the proliferation of different service interfaces will not be as useful as a
simple minimum uniform set of operations. It is interesting to note that, according to
Greenfield and Dornan [2004], 80% of the requests to the web services at
Amazon.com are via the REST interface, with the remaining 20% using SOAP.


===== page 405 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 387
format extensible, enabling any type of data to be transported. There is no limit to the
potential richness and complexity of documents formatted in XML, but there could be a
problem in interpreting those that become unduly complex.
Service references • In general, each web service has a URI, which clients use to refer
to it. The URL is the most frequently used form of URI. Because a URL contains the
domain name of a computer, the service to which it refers will always be accessed at that
computer. However, the access point of a web service with a URN can depend on
context and can change from time to time – its current URL can be obtained from a URN
lookup service. This service reference is known as an endpoint in web services.
Activation of services • A web service will be accessed via the computer whose domain
name is included in its current URL. That computer may run the web service itself or it
may run it on another server computer. For example, a service with tens of thousands of
clients may need to be deployed on hundreds of computers. A web service may run
continuously, or it may be activated on demand. The URL is a persistent reference,
meaning that it will continue to refer to the service for as long as the server the URL
points to exists.
Transparency • A major task of many middleware platforms is to protect the
programmer from the details of data representation and marshalling; another is to make
remote invocations look like local ones. None of these things are provided as a part of
an infrastructure or middleware platform for web services. At the simplest level, clients
and servers may read and write their messages directly in SOAP, using XML.
But for convenience, the details of SOAP and XML are generally hidden by a
local API in a programming language such as Java, Perl, Python or C++. In this case,
the service description may be used as a basis for automatically generating the necessary
marshalling and unmarshalling procedures.
Proxies: One way to hide the difference between local and remote calls is by providing
a client proxy or a set of stub procedures. Section 9.2.3 explains how this is done in Java.
Client proxies or stubs provide a static form of invocation in which the framework for
each call and the marshalling procedures are generated before any invocations are made.
Dynamic invocation: An alternative to proxies is to provide clients with a generic
operation to be used irrespective of the remote procedure to be called, similar to the
DoOperation procedure defined in Figure 5.3 (but without the first argument). In this
case, the client specifies the name of an operation and its arguments and they are
converted to SOAP and XML on the fly. The asynchronous communication of single
messages can be achieved in a similar way by providing clients with generic operations
for sending and receiving messages.
9.2.1 SOAP
SOAP is designed to enable both client-server and asynchronous interaction over the
Internet. It defines a scheme for using XML to represent the contents of request and
reply messages (see Figure 5.4) as well as a scheme for the communication of
documents. Originally SOAP was based only on HTTP, but the current version is
designed to use a variety of transport protocols including SMTP, TCP or UDP. The


===== page 406 =====
388 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Figure 9.3 SOAP message in an envelope
envelope
header
header element header element
body
body element body element
description in this section is based on SOAP version 1.2 [www.w3.org IX], which is a
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) recommendation. SOAP is an extension of
Userland’s XML-RPC [Winer 1999].
The SOAP specification states:
(cid:129) how XML is to be used to represent the contents of individual messages;
(cid:129) how a pair of single messages can be combined to produce a request-reply pattern;
(cid:129) the rules as to how the recipients of messages should process the XML elements
that they contain;
(cid:129) how HTTP and SMTP should be used to communicate SOAP messages. It is
expected that future versions of the specification will define how to use other
transport protocols, for example, TCP.
This section describes how SOAP uses XML to represent messages and HTTP to
communicate them. However, the programmer does not normally need to be concerned
with these details, since SOAP APIs have been implemented in many programming
languages, including Java, JavaScript, Perl, Python, .NET, C, C++, C# and Visual Basic.
To support client-server communication, SOAP specifies how to use the HTTP
POST method for the request message and its response for the reply message. The
combined use of XML and HTTP provides a standard protocol for client-server
communication over the Internet.
It is intended that a SOAP message can be passed via intermediaries on the way
to the computer that manages the resource to be accessed and that higher-level
middleware services such as transactions or security may use these intermediaries to
perform processing.
SOAP messages • A SOAP message is carried in an ‘envelope’. Inside the envelope
there is an optional header and a body, as shown in Figure 9.3. Message headers can be
used for establishing the necessary context for aservice or for keeping a log or audit of
operations. An intermediary may interpret and act on the information in the message


===== page 407 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 389
Figure 9.4 Example of a simple request without headers
env:envelope xmlns:env =namespace URI for SOAP envelopes
env:body
m:exchange
xmlns:m = namespace URI of the service description
m:arg1 m:arg2
Hello World
In this figure and the next, each XML element is represented by a shaded box with its
name in italics,at the top left corner,followed by any attributes and its content
headers, for example by adding, altering or removing information. The message body
carries an XML document for a particular web service.
The XML elements envelope,header and body, together with other attributes and
elements of SOAP messages, are defined asa schema in the SOAP XML namespace.
The definition of this schema can be found on the W3C web site [www.w3.org IX].
Since they use a textual encoding, XML schemas can be viewed with the ‘view source’
option of a browser. Both the header and the body contain inner elements.
The previous section explained that service descriptions contain information that
isto be shared by clients and servers. Message senders use these descriptions to generate
thebody and to ensure that it contains the correct contents, and message recipients use
them to parse and check the validity of the contents.
A SOAP message may be used either to convey a document or to support client-
server communication:
(cid:129) A document to be communicated is placed directly inside the body element
together with a reference to an XML schema containing the service description –
which defines the names and types used in the document. This sort of SOAP
message may be sent either synchronously or asynchronously.
(cid:129) For client-server communication, the body element contains either a Request or a
Reply. These two cases are illustrated in Figure 9.4 and Figure 9.5.
Figure 9.4 shows an example of a simple request message without a header. The body
encloses an element containing the name of the procedure to be called and the URI of
the namespace (the file containing the XML schema) for the relevant service
description, which is denoted by m. The inner elements of a request message contain the
arguments of the procedure. This request message provides two strings to be returned in
the opposite order by the procedure at the server. The XML namespace denoted by env
contains the SOAP definitions for an envelope. Figure 9.5 shows the corresponding
successful reply message, which contains the two output arguments.Note that the name
of the procedure has ‘Response’ added to it. If a procedure has a return value, then it may
be denoted as an element called rpc:result. The reply message uses the same two XML


===== page 408 =====
390 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Figure 9.5 Example of a reply corresponding to the request in Figure 9.4
env:envelope xmlns:env = namespace URI for SOAP envelope
env:body
m:exchangeResponse
xmlns:m = namespace URI for the service description
m:res1 m:res2
World Hello
schemas as the request message, the first defining the SOAP envelope and the second
the application-specific procedure and argument names.
Soap faults: If a request fails in some way, the fault descriptions are conveyed in the
body of a reply message in a fault element. This element contains information about the
fault, including a code and an associated string, together with application-specific
details.
SOAP headers • Message headers are intended to be used by intermediaries to add to
the service that deals with the message carried in the corresponding body. However, two
aspects of this usage are left unclear in the SOAP specification:
1. How the headers will be used by any particular higher middleware service. For
example, a header might contain:
– a transaction identifier for use with a transaction service;
– a message identifier for relating messages to one another, for example, for
implementing reliable delivery;
– ausername, a digital signature or a public key.
2. How the messages will be routed via a set of intermediaries to the ultimate
recipient. For example, a message transported by HTTP could be routed via a
chain of proxy servers, some of which might assume a SOAP role.
However, the specification does specify the roles and duties of intermediaries. An
attribute called role can specify whether every intermediary, none of them, or just the
ultimate recipient must process the element [www.w3.org IX]. The particular actions to
be carried out are defined by applications – for example, an action might be to log the
contents of an element.
Transport of SOAP messages • A transport protocol is required to send a SOAP
message to its destination. SOAP messages are independent of the type of transport used
– their envelopes contain no reference to the destination address. HTTP (or whatever
protocol is used to transport a SOAP message) is left to specify the destination address.
Figure 9.6 illustrates how the HTTP POST method is used to transmit a SOAP
message. The HTTP headers and body are used as follows:


===== page 409 =====
Figure 9.6 Use of HTTP POST Request in SOAP client-server communication
POST /examples/stringer endpoint address
Host: www.cdk4.net
Content-Type: application/soap+xml
Action: http://www.cdk4.net/examples/stringer#exchange action
<env:envelope xmlns:env = namespace URI for SOAP envelope>
<env:header> </env:header>
<env:body> </env:body>
</env:Envelope>
sredaeh
PTTH
egassem
PAOS
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 391
(cid:129) The HTTP headers specify the endpoint address (the URI of the ultimate receiver)
and the action to be carried out. The Action header is intended to optimize
dispatching by revealing the name of the operation without the need to analyze the
SOAP message in the body of the HTTP message.
(cid:129) The HTTP body carries the SOAP message.
As HTTP is a synchronous protocol, it is used to return a reply containing the SOAP
reply, like the one shown in Figure 9.5. Section 5.2 details the status codes and reasons
returned by HTTP for successful and failing requests.
If a SOAP Request is just a request for information to be returned, has no
arguments and does not alter data in the server, then the HTTP GET method can be used
to carry it out.
The above point about the Action header and dispatching applies to any service
that performs a variety of different actions for clients, even if it does not offer operations
as such. For example, a web service may be able to deal with various types of
documents, such as purchase orders and enquiries, which are dealt with by different
software modules. The Action header enables the correct module to be chosen without
inspecting the SOAP message. This header can be used if the HTTP content type is
specified as application/soap+xml.
The separation of the definition of the SOAP envelope from the information as to
how and where it is to be sent makes it possible to use a variety of different underlying
protocols. For example, the SOAP specification states how SMTP can be used as an
alternative way of transmitting documents encoded as SOAP messages.
But this strength is also a weakness. It implies that the developer must be involved
inthe details of the specific transport protocol chosen. In addition, it makes it difficult
to use different protocols for different parts of the route followed by a particular
message.
WS-Addressing: Advances in SOAP addressing and routing • Two problems were men-
tioned above:
(cid:129) how to make SOAP independent of the underlying transport used;
(cid:129) how to specify a route to be followed by a SOAP message via a set of
intermediaries.


===== page 410 =====
392 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Early work in this area by Nielsen and Thatte [2001] suggests that the endpoint address
and the dispatching information should be specified in SOAP headers. This effectively
separates the message destination from the underlying protocol. They suggested
specifying the path to be followed by giving the address of the endpoint and the ‘next
hop’. Each of the intermediaries would update the ‘next hop’ information.
The work of Box and Curbera [2004] suggests that having intermediaries alter the
headers could lead to breaches of security. They proposed WS-Addressing, which
allows SOAP headers to specify message routing data, with an underlying SOAP
infrastructure providing the ‘next hop’ information. The W3C recommendations for
WS-Addressing are defined in [www.w3.org XXIII]. This form of addressing uses an
Endpoint Reference – an XML structure containing the destination address, routing
information and possibly other information about the service. To support long-running
asynchronous interactions, SOAP headers can supply a return address and message
identifiers of their own and of related messages.
WS-ReliableMessaging: Reliable communication • SOAP’s usual protocol, HTTP,
runs over TCP, whose failure model is discussed in Section 4.2.4. To summarize: TCP
does not guarantee to deliver messages in the face of all difficulties, and when it times
out while waiting for acknowledgements, it declares that the connection is broken, at
which point the communicating processes are left without any idea as to whether the
messages they sent recently have been received or not.
Early work on the provision of reliable communication of SOAP messages with
guaranteed delivery, no duplicates and guaranteed message ordering led to two
competing specifications by Ferris and Langworthy [2004] and Evans et al. [2003].
More recently, Oasis (a global consortium that works on the development,
agreement and adoption of e-business and web service standards) has made a
recommendation called WS-ReliableMessaging [www.oasis.org]. This allows a SOAP
message to be delivered at-least-once, at-most-once or exactly-once,with the following
semantics:
At-least-once: The message is delivered at least once, but an error is reported if it
cannot be delivered.
At-most-once:The message is delivered at most once, but without any error report if
it cannot be delivered.
Exactly-once: The message is delivered exactly once, but an error is reported if it
cannot be delivered.
Ordering of messages is also provided in combination with any of the above:
In-order: Messages will be delivered to the destination in the order in which they
were sent by a particular sender.
Note that WS-ReliableMessaging is concerned with the delivery of single messages and
should not be confused with the RPC call semantics described in Section 5.3.1, which
refer to the number of times the server executes the remote procedure. The reader is
referred to Exercise 9.16 for further consideration of the comparison.
Traversing firewalls • Web services are intended to be used by clients in one
organization to access servers in another organization over the Internet. Most


===== page 411 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 393
organizations use a firewall to protect the resources on their own networks, and
transport protocols such as those used by Java RMI or CORBA will not normally be able
to pass through a firewall. However, firewalls do normally allow both HTTP and SMTP
messages to pass through them. Therefore it is convenient to use one of these protocols
for transporting SOAP messages.
9.2.2 A comparison of web services with the distributed object model
A web service has a service interface that can provide operations for accessing and
updating the data resources it manages. At a superficial level, the interaction between
client and server is very similar to RMI, where a client uses a remote object reference to
invoke an operation in a remote object. For a web service, the client uses a URI to invoke
an operation in the resource named by that URI. For arguments about the similarities and
differences between web services and distributed objects, see Birman [2004], Vinoski
[2002] and Vogels [2003].
We shall attempt to show that there are limits to the above analogy, by making use
of the shared whiteboard example used in Section 5.5 for Java RMI and Section 8.3 for
CORBA.
Remote object references versus URIs • The URI of a web service can be compared
with the remote object reference of a single object. However, in the distributed object
model, objects can create remote objects dynamically and return remote references to
them. The recipient of these remote references can use them to invoke operations in the
objects to which they refer. In the shared whiteboard example, an invocation of the
newShape factory method causes a new instance of Shape to be created and a remote
reference to it is returned. Nothing like this can be done with web services, which cannot
create instances of remote objects; effectively, a web service consists of a single remote
object and therefore both garbage collection and remote object referencing are
irrelevant.
Web services model • The users of the Java web services toolkit (JAX-RPC)
[java.sun.com VII] must model their web services programs to allow for the fact that
they are not using transparent Java-to-Java remote invocation but rather are using the
web services model, in which remote objects cannot be instantiated. This is taken into
account by JAX-RPC, which does not permit remote object references to be passed as
arguments or returned as results.
Figure 9.7 shows a version of the interface given in Figure 5.16 which has been
modified as follows to become a web services interface:
(cid:129) In the original (distributed object) version of the program, instances of Shape are
created in the server and remote references to them are returned by newShape,
whose modified (web service) version is shown in line 1. To avoid the
instantiation of remote objects and the consequent use of remote object references,
theShape interface is removed and its operations (getAllState and getGOVersion
–originally getVersion) are added to the ShapeList interface.
(cid:129) In the original (distributed object) version of the program, the server stored a
vector of Shape. This will be changed to a vector of GraphicalObject. The new


===== page 412 =====
394 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Figure 9.7 Java web service interface ShapeList
import java.rmi.*;
public interface ShapeList extends Remote {
int newShape(GraphicalObject g) throws RemoteException; 1
int numberOfShapes() throws RemoteException;
int getVersion() throws RemoteException;
int getGOVersion(int i) throws RemoteException;
GraphicalObject getAllState(int i) throws RemoteException;
}
(web service) version of the method newShape returns an integer that gives the
offset of the GraphicalObject in that vector.
This change to the method newShape means that it is no longer a factory method – that
is, it does not create instances of remote objects.
Servants • In the distributed object model, the server program is generally modelled as
a collection of servants (potentially remote objects). For example, the shared whiteboard
application used one servant for the list of shapes and one servant for each graphical
object created. These servants were created as instances of the servant classes ShapeList
andShape, respectively. When the server started, its main function created the instance
ofShapeList, and each time the client called the newShape method the server created an
instance of Shape.
In contrast, web services do not support servants. Therefore web services
applications cannot create servants as and when they are needed to handle different
server resources. To enforce this situation, the implementations of web service
interfaces must not have either constructors or main methods.
9.2.3 The use of SOAP with Java
The Java API for developing web services and clients over SOAP is called JAX-RPC.
It is described in the Java web services tutorial [java.sun.com VII]. This API hides all
the details of SOAP from the programmers of both clients and the services.
JAX-RPC maps some of the types in the Java language to definitions in XML used
in both SOAP messages and service descriptions. The permitted types include Integer,
String,Date and Calendar, as well as java.net.uri, which allows URIs to be passed as
arguments or returned as results. It supports some of the collection types (including
Vector) as well as the primitive types of the language and arrays.
In addition, instances of some classes may be passed as arguments and results of
remote calls, provided that:
(cid:129) Eachof their instance variables is one of the permitted types.
(cid:129) They have a public default constructor.
(cid:129) They do not implement the Remote interface.


===== page 413 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 395
Figure 9.8 Java implementation of the ShapeList server
import java.util.Vector;
public class ShapeListImpl implements ShapeList{
private Vector theList = new Vector();
private int version = 0;
private Vector theVersions = new Vector();
public int newShape(GraphicalObject g) throws RemoteException{
version++;
theList.addElement(g);
theVersions.addElement(new Integer(version));
return theList.size();
}
public int numberOfShapes(){}
public int getVersion() {}
public int getGOVersion(int i){}
public GraphicalObject getAllState(int i) {}
}
In general, as mentioned in the previous section, values of types that are remote
references (that is, that implement the Remote interface) cannot be passed as arguments
or returned as results of remote calls.
The service interface • The Java interface of a web service must conform to the
following rules, some of which are illustrated in Figure 9.7:
(cid:129) It must extend the Remote interface.
(cid:129) Itmust not have constant declarations, such as public final static.
(cid:129) The methods must throw java.rmi.RemoteException or one of its subclasses.
(cid:129) Method parameters and return types must be permitted JAX-RPC types.
The server program • The class that implements the interface ShapeList is shown in
Figure 9.8. As explained above, there is no main method, and the implementation of the
ShapeList interface does not have a constructor. In effect, a web service is a single object
that offers a set of procedures. The source of the programs shown in Figure 9.7,Figure
9.8 and Figure 9.9 is available on the book’s web site at www.cdk5.net/web.
The service interface and its implementation are compiled as usual. A pair of tools
called wscompile and wsdeploy can be used to generate the skeleton class and the service
description (in WSDL, as described in Section 9.3), using information concerning the
URL of the service, its name and description retrieved from a configuration file written
in XML. The name of the service (in this case, MyShapeListService) is used to generate
the name of the class used in the client program to access it – that is,
MyShapeListService_Impl.


===== page 414 =====
396 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Servlet container • The service implementation is run as a servlet inside a servlet
container whose role is to load, initialize and execute servlets. The servlet container
includes a dispatcher and skeletons (see Section 5.4.2). When a request arrives, the
dispatcher maps it to a particular skeleton, which translates it into Java and passes on the
request to the appropriate method in the servlet. That method carries out the request and
produces a reply, which the skeleton translates back into a SOAP reply. The URL of a
service consists of a concatenation of the URL of the servlet container and the service
category and name, for example, http://localhost:8080/ShapeList-jaxrpc/ShapeList.
Tomcat [jakarta.apache.org] is a commonly used servlet container. When Tomcat
is running, its management interface is available at a URL for viewing with a browser.
This interface shows the names of servlets that are currently deployed and provides
operations for managing them and for accessing information about each one, including
its service description. Once a servlet is deployed in Tomcat, clients may access it and
the combined effects of their operations will be stored in its instance variables. In our
example, a list of GraphicalObjects will be built up as each one is added as the result of
a client request to the newShape operation. If a servlet is stopped by Tomcat’s
management interface, then the values of the instance variables are reset when it is
restarted.
Tomcat also provides access to a description of each of the services that it
contains, to enable programmers to design client programs and to facilitate the
automatic compilation of the proxies required by client code. The service description is
human-readable since it is expressed in XML notation (more specifically, in WSDL, as
introduced in Section 9.3).
Note that it is possible to develop web services without using servlet containers;
for example, Apache Axis hides this level of detail from the programmer.
The client program • The client program may use static proxies, dynamic proxies or a
dynamic invocation interface. In all cases, the relevant service description may be used
to obtain any information required by client code. In our example, the service
description can be obtained from Tomcat.
Static proxies: Figure 9.9 shows the ShapeList client making a call through a proxy – a
local object that passes on messages to the remote service. The code for the proxy is
generated by wscompile from the service description. The class name for the proxy is
formed by adding ‘_Impl’ to the name of the service – in this case, the proxy class is
called MyShapeListService_Impl. This name is implementation-specific, since the
SOAP specification does not give a rule for naming proxy classes.
At line 1, the createProxy method is called. This method is shown at line 5; line 6
creates a proxy, using the class MyShapeListService_Impl, which it returns (note that
proxies are sometimes called stubs, hence the name of the class, Stub). At line 2, the
URL of the service is supplied to the proxy via the argument given on the command line.
At line 3, the type of the proxy is narrowed to suit the type of the interface – ShapeList.
Line 4 makes a call to the remote procedure getAllState, asking the service to return the
object at element 0 in the vector of GraphicalObjects.
Because the proxy is created at compile time, it is called a static proxy. The service
description of the service from which it was generated will not necessarily have been
generated from a Java interface, but may have been made by any one of a variety of tools


===== page 415 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 397
Figure 9.9 Java implementation of the ShapeList client
package staticstub;
import javax.xml.rpc.Stub;
public class ShapeListClient {
public static void main(String[] args) { /* pass URL of service */
try {
Stub proxy = createProxy(); 1
proxy._setProperty 2
(javax.xml.rpc.Stub.ENDPOINT_ADDRESS_PROPERTY, args[0]);
ShapeList aShapeList = (ShapeList)proxy; 3
GraphicalObject g = aShapeList.getAllState(0); 4
} catch (Exception ex) { ex.printStackTrace(); }
}
private static Stub createProxy() { 5
return
(Stub) (new MyShapeListService_Impl().getShapeListPort()); 6
}
}
associated with various different language systems. It may even have been written
directly in XML.
Dynamic proxies: Instead of using a precompiled static proxy, the client may use a
dynamic proxy whose class is created at runtime from the information in the service
description and the interface of the service. This method avoids the need for involving
an implementation-specific name for the proxy class.
Dynamic invocation interface: This allows a client to call a remote procedure, even if its
signature or the name of the service is unknown until runtime. In contrast to the above
alternatives, the client does not require a proxy. Instead, it has to use a series of
operations to set the name of the server operation, the return value and each of the
parameters before making the procedure call.
Implementation of Java SOAP • The way the Java API is implemented can be explained
with reference to Figure 5.15. The following paragraphs explain the roles of the various
components in a Java/SOAP environment – the interactions between the components are
the same as before. There is no remote reference module.
Communication modules: The tasks of these modules are carried out by a pair of HTTP
modules. The HTTP module in the server selects the dispatcher according to the URL
given in the Action header to the POST request.
Client proxy: A proxy (or stub) method knows the URL of the service and marshals its
own method name and its arguments, together with a reference to the XML schema for
the service, into a SOAP request envelope. Unmarshalling the reply consists of
analyzing a SOAP envelope in order to extract the results, return value or fault report.
The client’s request method call is sent to the service as an HTTP request.


===== page 416 =====
398 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Dispatcher and skeleton: As mentioned above, the dispatcher and skeletons live in the
servlet container. The dispatcher extracts the name of the operation from the Action
header in the HTTP request and invokes the corresponding method in the appropriate
skeleton, passing the SOAP envelope to it. A skeleton method carries out the following
tasks: it analyzes the SOAP envelope in the request message and extracts its arguments,
calls the corresponding method and assembles a SOAP reply envelope containing the
results.
Errors, faults and correctness in SOAP/XML: Faults may be reported by the HTTP
module, the dispatcher, the skeleton or the service itself. The service can report its errors
via a return value or by means of fault parameters specified in the service description.
The skeleton is responsible for checking that the SOAP envelope contains a request and
that the XML in which it is written is well-formed. Having established that the XML is
well-formed, the skeleton will use the XML namespace in the envelope to check that the
request corresponds to the service on offer and that the operation and its arguments are
appropriate. If the checking of the request fails at either of these levels, then an error is
returned to the client. Similar checks are made by the proxy when it receives the SOAP
envelope containing the result.
9.2.4 Comparison of web services with CORBA
The main difference between web services and CORBA or other similar middleware is
the intended usage context. CORBA was designed for use within a single organization
or between a small number of collaborating organizations. This resulted in certain
aspects of the design being too centralized for collaborative use by independent
organizations or for ad hoc use without prior arrangements, as will now be explained.
Naming issues • In CORBA, each remote object is referenced by means of a name that
is managed by an instance of the CORBA Naming Service (see Section 8.3.5). This
service, like the DNS, provides a mapping from a name to a value to be used as an
address (an IOR in CORBA). But unlike the DNS, the CORBA Naming Service is
designed for use within an organization, instead of throughout the Internet.
In the CORBA Naming Service, each server manages a graph of names with an
initial naming context and is initially independent of any other servers. Although
separate organizations may federate their naming services, this is not automatic. Before
a server can federate with another, it needs to know the other server’s initial naming
context. Thus, the design of the CORBA Naming Service effectively restricts the
sharing of CORBA objects to within a small set of organizations that have federated
their naming services.
Reference issues • We now consider whether a CORBA remote object reference,
which is called an IOR (Section 8.3.3), could be used as an Internet-wide object
reference in the same way as a URL. Each IOR contains a slot that specifies the type
identifier of the interface of the object it references. However, this type identifier is
understood only by the interface repository that stores the definition of the
corresponding type. This has the implication that the client and server need to use the
same interface repository, which is not really practical on a global scale.


===== page 417 =====
SECTION 9.2 WEB SERVICES 399
In contrast, in the web services model, a service is identified by means of a URL,
enabling a client anywhere in the Internet to make a request to a service that may belong
to any organization anywhere else. That is, a web service can be shared by clients
throughout the Internet. The DNS is the only service required for URL access, and it is
designed to work effectively Internet-wide.
Separation of activation and location • The tasks of locating and activating web services
are neatly separated. In contrast, a CORBA persistent reference refers to a component
of the platform (the implementation repository) that activates the corresponding object
on demand on any suitable computer and is also responsible for locating the object once
it has been activated.
Ease of use • The HTTP and XML infrastructure for web services is well understood
and convenient to use and is already installed on all of the most commonly used
operating systems, although the user does require a convenient programming language
API to SOAP. In contrast, the CORBA platform is a large and complex piece of software
requiring installation and support.
Efficiency • CORBA has been designed to be efficient: CORBA CDR (Section 4.3.1) is
binary, whereas XML is textual. A study by Olson and Ogbuji [2002] compared the
performance of CORBA with that of SOAP and XML-RPC. They found that SOAP
request messages are 14 times as large as the equivalent ones in CORBA and that a
SOAP request took, on average, 882 times as long as an equivalent CORBA invocation.
Although the relative performance is dependent on the language used and also the
particular middleware implementation employed, this example does provide an
indication of the potential overhead of XML-based approaches. For many applications,
however, the message overhead and slower performance of SOAP are not noticed, and
its effects are made less obvious by the availability of cheap bandwidth, processors,
memory and disk space.
The W3C and others have been investigating the possibility of allowing binary
data to be included in XML elements, so as to increase efficiency. Discussions of this
topic can be found at [www.w3.org XXI] and [www.w3.org XXII]. Note that XML does
already provide for both hexadecimal and base64 representations of binary data. The
base64 representation is used in conjunction with XML encryption (see Section 9.5).
There is a considerable time and space overhead when binary data is converted to base64
or hexadecimal, so what is really needed is to be able to include a binary representation
of a preparsed sequence of data items such as, for example, that produced by CORBA
CDR or gzip. Another approach that is also under investigation is to take a SOAP
message – together with attachments, some of which may be binary –and use a multipart
MIME document to transport it.
The strengths of CORBA • The availability of CORBA services for transactions,
concurrency control, security and access control, events and persistent objects makes it
a desirable choice for use in many applications that are intended for use within an
organization or a related group of organizations. In general, it is a good choice for those
applications that require very complex interactions. In addition, the distributed object
model is an attractive one for the design of complex applications, and it is worth the
extra learning effort needed to understand the details of the relationship between the
CORBA object model (Section 8.3) and the particular programming language in use.


===== page 418 =====
400 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Figure 9.10 The main elements in a WSDL description
definitions
types message interface bindings services
target namespace document-style request-reply-style how where
abstract concrete
9.3 Service descriptions and IDL for web services
Interface definitions are needed to allow clients to communicate with services. For web
services, interface definitions are provided as part of a more general service description,
which specifies two other additional characteristics – how the messages are to be
communicated (for example, by SOAP over HTTP) and the URI of the service. To cater
for use in a multi-language environment, service descriptions are written in XML.
A service description forms the basis of an agreement between a client and a
server as to the service on offer. It assembles all of the facts concerning the service that
are relevant to its clients. Service descriptions are generally used to generate client stubs
that automatically implement the correct behaviour for the client.
The IDL-like component of a service description is more flexible than other IDLs,
in that a service may be specified either in terms of the types of messages that it will send
and receive or in terms of the operations it supports, to allow for both document
exchange and request-reply-style interactions.
A variety of different methods of communication can be used by web services and
their clients. Therefore the method of communication is left to be decided by the service
provider and specified in the service description, rather than built into the system, as it
is in CORBA, for example.
The ability to specify the URI of a service as a part of the service description
avoids the need for the separate binder or naming service used by most other
middleware. It has the implication that the URI cannot be changed once the service
description has been made available to potential clients, but the URN scheme does cater
for a change of location by allowing for an indirection at the reference level.
In contrast, in the binder approach, the client uses a name to look up the service
reference at runtime, allowing the service references to change over time. This approach
requires an indirection from a name to a service reference for all services, even though
many of them may always remain at the same location.
In the web services context, the Web Services Description Language (WSDL) is
commonly used for service descriptions. The current version, WSDL 2.0 [www.w3.org
XI], became a W3C Recommendation in 2007. It defines an XML schema for
representing the components of a service description, which include, for example, the
element names definitions,types,message,interface,bindings and services.
WSDL separates the abstract part of a service description from the concrete part,
as shown in Figure 9.10.


===== page 419 =====
SECTION 9.3 SERVICE DESCRIPTIONS AND IDL FOR WEB SERVICES 401
Figure 9.11 WSDL request and reply messages for the newShape operation
message name = "ShapeList_newShape" message name = "ShapeList_newShapeResponse"
part name="GraphicalObject_1" part name="result"
type = "ns:GraphicalObject" type = "xsd:int"
tns – target namespace xsd – XML schema definitions
The abstract part of the description includes a set of definitions of the types used
by the service – in particular, the types of the values exchanged in messages. The Java
example from Section 9.2.3, whose Java interface is shown in Figure 9.7, uses the Java
types int and GraphicalObject. The former (like any basic type) can be translated
directly into the XML equivalent, but GraphicalObject is defined in Java in terms of the
types int,String and boolean.GraphicalObject is represented in XML, for common use
by heterogeneous clients, as a complexType consisting of a sequence of named XML
types including, for example:
<element name="isFilled" type="boolean"/>
<element name="originx" type="int"/>
The set of names defined within the types section of a WSDL definition is called its
target namespace. The message section of the abstract part contains a description of the
set of messages exchanged. For the document style of interaction, these messages will
be used directly. For the request-reply style of interaction, there are two messages for
each operation, which are used to describe the operations in the interface section. The
concrete part specifies how and where the service may be contacted.
The inherent modularity of a WSDL definition allows its components to be
combined in different ways – for example, the same interface may be used with
different bindings or locations. The types may be defined inside the types element or
they may be defined in a separate document referenced by a URI from the types element.
In the latter case, the type definitions can be referenced from several different WSDL
documents.
Messages or operations • In web services, all that the client and the server need is to
have a common idea about the messages to be exchanged. For a service based on the
exchange of a small number of different types of document, WSDL just describes the
types of the different messages to be exchanged. When a client sends one of these
messages to a web service, the latter decides what operation to perform and what type
of message to send back to the client on the basis of the message type received. In our
Java example, two messages will be defined for each of the operations in the interface –
one for the request and one for the reply. For example, Figure 9.11 shows the request
and reply messages for the newShapeoperation, which has a single input argument of
type GraphicalObject and a single output argument of type int.
For services that support several different operations, it is more effective to
specify the messages exchanged as requests for operations with arguments and their
corresponding replies, allowing the service to dispatch each request to the appropriate


===== page 420 =====
402 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Figure 9.12 Message exchange patterns for WSDL operations
Name Messages sent by
Client Server Delivery Fault message
In-Out Request Reply May replace Reply
In-Only Request No fault message
Robust In-Only Request Guaranteed May be sent
Out-In Reply Request May replaceReply
Out-Only Request No fault message
Robust Out-Only Request Guaranteed May send fault
operation. However, in WSDL an operation is a construct for relating request and reply
messages, in contrast to the definition of an operation in a service interface.
Interface • The collection of operations belonging to a web service are grouped
together in an XML element named interface (sometimes called portType). Each
operation must specify the message exchange pattern between client and server. The
available options include those shown in Figure 9.12. The first one, In-Out, is the
commonly used request-reply form of client-servercommunication. In this pattern, the
reply message may be replaced with a fault message. In-Only is for one-way messages
withmaybe semantics and Out-Only is for oneway messages from server to client; fault
messages cannot be sent with either. Robust In-Only and Robust Out-Only are the
corresponding messages with guaranteed delivery; fault messages may be exchanged.
Out-In is a request-reply interaction initiated by the server. WSDL 2.0 is also extensible
in that organizations can introduce their own message exchange patterns if the
predefined ones prove to be inadequate.
Returning to our Java example, each of the operations is defined to have an In-Out
pattern. The operation newShape is shown in Figure 9.13, using the messages defined in
Figure 9.11. This definition, together with definitions of the four other operations will
be enclosed in an XML interface element. An operation may also specify the fault
messages that can be sent.
Figure 9.13 WSDL operation newShape
operation name = "newShape"
pattern = In-Out
input message = "tns:ShapeList_newShape"
output message = "tns:ShapeList_newShapeResponse"
tns – target namespace xsd – XML schema definitions
The names operation, pattern, input and output are defined in the XML schema for WSDL


===== page 421 =====
SECTION 9.3 SERVICE DESCRIPTIONS AND IDL FOR WEB SERVICES 403
Figure 9.14 SOAP binding and service definitions
binding service
name = "ShapeListBinding" name = "MyShapeListService"
type = "tns:ShapeList"
endpoint
soap:bindingtransport = URI name = "ShapeListPort"
for schemas for soap/http
style= "rpc" binding = "tns:ShapeListBinding"
operation soap:address
name="newShape"
location = service URI
input
soap:body
encoding, namespace
output The service URI is:
soap:body
"http://localhost:8080/ShapeList-jaxrpc/ShapeList"
encoding, namespace
soap:operation
soapAction
If, for example, an operation has two arguments –say, an integer and a string –
there is no need to define a new data type, since these types are defined for XML
schemas. However, it will be necessary to define a message that has these two parts. This
message can then be used as an input or output in the definition for the operation.
Inheritance: Any WSDL interface may extend one or more other WSDL interfaces. This
is a simple form of inheritance in which an interface supports the operations of any
interfaces it extends in addition to those it defines itself. Recursive definition of
interfaces is not allowed; that is, if interface B extends interface A, then interface A
cannot extend interface B.
Concrete part • The remaining (concrete) part of a WSDL document consists of the
binding (the choice of protocols) and the service (the choice of endpoint or server
address). The two are related, since the form of address depends on the type of protocol
in use. For example, a SOAP endpoint will use a URI whereas a CORBA endpoint will
use a CORBA-specific object identifier.
Binding: The binding section in a WSDL document says which message formats and
form of external data representation are to be used. For example, web services frequently
use SOAP, HTTP and MIME. Bindings may be associated with particular operations or
interfaces, or they may be left free for use by a variety of different web services.
Figure 9.14 shows an example of a binding enclosing a soap:binding that specifies
the URL of a particular protocol for transmitting SOAP envelopes: the HTTP binding
for SOAP. Optional attributes of this element may also specify the following:
(cid:129) the message exchange pattern, which may be either rpc (request-reply) or
document exchange –the default value is document;


===== page 422 =====
404 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
(cid:129) the XML schema for the message formats –the default is the SOAP envelope;
(cid:129) the XML schema for the external data representation – the default is the SOAP
encoding of XML.
Figure 9.14 also shows the details of the bindings for one of the operations (newShape),
specifying that both the input and the output message should travel in a soap:body, using
a particular encoding style, and that the operation should be transmitted as a soapAction.
Service: Each service element in a WSDL document specifies the name of the service
and one or more endpoints (or ports) where an instance of the service may be contacted.
Each of the endpoint elements refers to the name of the binding in use and, in the case
of a SOAP binding, uses a soap:address element to specify the URI of the service
location.
Documentation • Both human- and machine-readable information may be inserted in a
documentation element at most points within a WSDL document. This information may
be removed before WSDL is used for automatic processing, for example, by stub
compilers.
WSDL use • Complete WSDL documents can be accessed via their URIs by clients and
servers, either directly or indirectly via a directory service such as UDDI. Tools are
available for generating WSDL definitions from information provided via a graphical
user interface, removing the need for users to be involved in the complex details and
structure of WSDL. For example, the Web Services Description Language for Java
Toolkit (WSDL4J) allows the creation, representation and manipulation of WSDL
documents describing services [wsdl4j.sourceforge.org]. WSDL definitions can also be
generated from interface definitions written in other languages, such as Java JAX-RPC,
discussed in Section 9.2.1.
9.4 A directory service for use with web services
There are many ways in which clients can obtain service descriptions. For example,
anyone providing a higher-level web service like the travel agent service discussed in
Section 9.1 would almost certainly make a web page advertising the service and
potential clients would come across the web page when searching for services of that
type.
However, any organization that plans to base its applications on web services will
find it more convenient to use a directory service to make these services available to
clients. This is the purpose of the Universal Description, Discovery and Integration
service (UDDI) [Bellwood et al. 2003], which provides both a name service and a
directory service (see Section 13.3). That is, WSDL service descriptions may be looked
up by name (a white pages service) or by attribute (a yellow pages service). They may
also be accessed directly via their URLs, which is convenient for developers who are
designing client programs that use the service.
Clients may use the yellow pages approach to look up a particular category of
service, such as travel agent or bookseller, or they may use the white pages approach to
look up a service with reference to the organization that provides it.


===== page 423 =====
SECTION 9.4 A DIRECTORY SERVICE FOR USE WITH WEB SERVICES 405
Figure 9.15 The main UDDI data structures
businessEntity businessServices
human-readable businessServices
information
about the publisher businessServices bindingTemplate
human-readable
bindingTemplate
information
URL
about a bindingTemplate tModel
information
family of services tModel
about the
URL
sesrevrivciec ei nintetrefrafcaecses
tModel
key
URL
key service descriptions
key
Data structures • The data structures supporting UDDI are designed to allow all the
above styles of access and can incorporate any amount of human-readable information.
The data is organized in terms of the four structures shown in Figure 9.15, each of which
can be accessed individually by means of an identifier called a key(apart from tModel,
which can be accessed by a URL):
businessEntity describes the organization that provides these web services, giving its
name, address and activities, etc.;
businessServices stores information about a set of instances of a web service, such as
its name and a description of its purpose (for example, travel agent or bookseller);
bindingTemplate holds the address of a web service instance and references to
service descriptions;
tModel holds service descriptions, usually WSDL documents, stored outside the
database and accessed by means of URLs.
Lookup • UDDI provides an API for looking up services based on two sets of query
operations:
(cid:129) The get_xxx set of operations includes get_BusinessDetail, get_ServiceDetail,
get_bindingDetail and get_tModelDetail; they retrieve an entity corresponding to
a given key.
(cid:129) Thefind_xxxset of operations includes find_business, find_service, find_binding
and find_tModel; they retrieve the set of entities that matches a particular set of
search criteria, providing a summary of names, descriptions, keys and URLs.
Thus clients in possession of a particular key may use a get_xxx operation to retrieve the
corresponding entity directly, and other clients may use browsing to assist with searches,
starting with a large set of results and gradually narrowing it down. For example, they
may start by using the find_business operation in order to get a list containing a summary


===== page 424 =====
406 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
of information on matching providers. From this summary, the user may use the
find_service operation to narrow the search by matching the sort of service required. In
both cases, they will find the key of a suitable bindingTemplate and thereby find the
URL for retrieving the WSDL document for a suitable service.
In addition, UDDI provides a notify/subscribe interface by which clients register
interest in a particular set of entities in a UDDI registry and get change notifications,
either synchronously or asynchronously.
Publication • UDDI provides an interface for publishing and updating information
about web services. The first time that a data structure (see Figure 9.15) is published at
a UDDI server, it is given a key in the form of a URI –for example, uddi:cdk5.net:213
–and that server becomes its owner.
Registries • The UDDI service is based on replicated data stored in registries. A UDDI
registry consists of one or more UDDI servers, each of which has a copy of the same set
of data. The data is replicated between the members of a registry. Each of them may
respond to queries and publish information. Changes to a data structure must be
submitted to its owner – that is, the server at which it was first published. It is possible
for an owner to pass on the ownership to another UDDI server in the same registry.
Replication scheme: The members of a registry propagate copies of data structures to one
another as follows: a server that has made changes notifies the other servers in the
registry, which then request the changes. A form of vector timestamp is used to
determine which of the changes should be propagated and applied. The scheme is simple
in comparison with other replication schemes that use vector timestamps, such as Gossip
(Section 18.4.1) or Coda (Section 18.4.3) for two reasons:
1. All changes to a particular data structure are made at the same server.
2. Updates from a particular server are received in sequential order by the other
members, but no particular ordering is imposed between update operations made
by different servers.
Interaction between servers: As described above, servers interact with one another to
carry out the replication scheme. They can also interact in order to transfer ownership of
data structures. However, the response to a lookup operation is made by a single server
without any interaction with other servers in the registry, unlike in the X.500 directory
service (Section 13.5), in which data is partitioned between servers that cooperate with
one another in finding the relevant server for a particular request.
9.5 XML security
XML security consists of a set of related W3C designs for signing, key management and
encryption. It is intended for use in cooperative work over the Internet involving
documents whose contents may need to be authenticated or encrypted. Typically the
documents are created, exchanged, stored and then exchanged again, possibly after
being modified by a series of different users.


===== page 425 =====
SECTION 9.5 XML SECURITY 407
WS-Security [Kaler 2002] is another approach to security that is concerned with
applying message integrity, message confidentiality and single message authentication
to SOAP.
As an example of a context in which XML security would be useful, consider a
document containing a patient’s medical records. Different parts of this document are
used at the local doctor’s surgery and at the various special clinics and hospitals visited
by the patient. It will be updated by doctors, nurses and consultants making notes on the
patient’s condition and treatment, by administrators making appointments and by
pharmacists providing medicine. Different parts of the document will be viewable by the
different roles mentioned above, and possibly the patient as well. It is essential that
certain parts of the document, for example, recommendations as to treatment, can be
attributed to the person that made them and can be guaranteed not to have been altered.
These needs cannot be met by TLS (previously known as SSL and described in
Section 11.6.3), which is used to create a secure channel for the communication of
information. It allows the processes at the two ends of the channel to negotiate as to the
need for authentication or encryption and the keys and algorithms to be used, both when
a channel is set up and during its lifetime. For example, data about a financial transaction
might be signed and sent in the clear until sensitive information such as credit card
details are to be given, at which point encryption will be applied.
To allow for the new type of usage outlined above, the security must be specified
within the document itself and applied to the document rather than as a property of the
channel that will convey it from one user to another.
This is possible in XML or other structured document formats, in which metadata
can be used. XML tags can be used to define the properties of the data in the document.
In particular, XML security depends on new tags that can be used to indicate the
beginning and end of sections of encrypted or signed data and of signatures. Once the
necessary security has been applied within a document, it may be sent to a variety of
different users, even by means of multicast.
Basic requirements • XML security should provide at least the same level of protection
as TLS. That is:
To be able to encrypt either an entire document or just some selected parts of it: For
example, consider the information about a financial transaction, which includes a
person’s name, the type of transaction and details about the credit or debit card being
used. In one case, just the card details could be hidden, making it possible to identify
the transaction before decrypting the record. In another case, the type of transaction
could also be hidden, so that outsiders cannot tell whether it is, for example, an order
or a payment.
To be able to sign either an entire document or just some selected parts of it: When
a document is intended to be used for cooperative work by a group of people, there
can be some critical parts of the document that should be signed in order to guarantee
that they were made by a particular person or that they have not been changed. But it
is also useful to be able to have other parts that can be altered during the use of the
document – these should not be signed.


===== page 426 =====
408 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Additional basic requirements • Further requirements arise from the need to store
documents, possibly to modify them and then to send them on to a variety of different
recipients:
To add to a document that is already signed and to sign the result: For example, Alice
may sign a document and pass it on to Bob, who ‘witnesses her signature’ by adding
a remark to that effect and then signing the entire document. (Section 11.1 introduces
the names, including Alice and Bob, used for the protagonists in security protocols.)
To authorize different users to view different parts of a document: In the case of a
medical record, a researcher can view some particular section of the medical data, an
administrator can view personal details and a doctor can view both.
To add to a document that already contains encrypted sections and to encrypt part of
the new version, possibly including some of the already encrypted sections.
The flexibility and structuring capabilities of XML notation make it possible do all of
the above, without any additions to the scheme derived from the basic requirements.
Requirements concerning algorithms • XML secure documents are signed and/or en-
crypted well in advance of any consideration as to who will be accessing them. If the
originator is no longer involved, it is not possible to negotiate the protocols and whether
to use authentication or encryption. Therefore:
The standard should specify a suite of algorithms to be provided in any implementa-
tion of XML security: At least one encryption and one signature algorithm should be
mandatory, to enable the widest possible interoperability. Other optional algorithms
should be provided for use within smaller groups.
The algorithms used for encryption and authentication of a particular document must
be selected from that suite and the names of the algorithms in use must be referenced
within the XML document itself: If the places where the document will be used cannot
be predicted, then one of the required protocols should be used.
XML security defines the names of elements that can be used to specify the URI of the
algorithm in use for signing or encryption. So as to be able to select a variety of
algorithms within the same XML document, an element that specifies an algorithm is
generally nested inside an element containing signed information or encrypted data.
Requirements for finding keys • When a document is created and each time that it is
updated, appropriate keys must be chosen, without any negotiation with those parties
that may access the document in the future. This leads to the following requirements:
To help the users of secure documents with finding the necessary keys: For example,
a document that includes signed data should contain information as to the public key
to be used to validate the signature, such as a name that can be used to obtain the key,
or a certificate. A KeyInfo element can be used for this purpose.
To make it possible for cooperating users to help one another with keys: Provided
that the KeyInfo element is not cryptographically bound to the signature itself,
information may be added without breaking the digital signature. For example,
suppose Alice signs a document and sends it to Bob with a KeyInfo element that
specifies only the name of the key. When Bob receives the document he retrieves the
information needed to validate the signature and adds this to the KeyInfo element
when he passes the document to Carol.


===== page 427 =====
SECTION 9.5 XML SECURITY 409
Figure 9.16 Algorithms required for XML signature
Type of algorithm Name of algorithm Required reference
Message digest SHA-1 Required Section 11.4.3
Encoding base64 Required [Freed and Borenstein 1996]
Signature DSA with SHA-1 Required [NIST 1994]
(asymmetric) RSA with SHA-1 Recommended Section 11.3.2
MAC signature HMAC-SHA-1 Required Section 11.4.2 and (cid:3)
(symmetric) Krawczyket al. [1997]
Canonicalization Canonical XML Required Page 409
The KeyInfo element • XML security specifies a KeyInfo element for indicating the key
to be used to validate a signature or to decrypt some data. It may contain, for example,
certificates, the names of keys or key agreement algorithms. Its use is optional: the
signer may not want to reveal any key information to all of the parties that access the
document, and in some cases the application using XML security may already have
access to the keys in use.
Canonical XML • Some applications may make changes that have no effect on the
actual information content of an XML document. This arises because there are a variety
of different ways of representing what is logically the same XML document. For
example, attributes may be in different orders and differing character encodings may be
used, yet the information content is equivalent. Canonical XML [www.w3.org X] was
designed for use with digital signatures, which are used to guarantee that the information
content of a document has not been changed. XML elements are canonicalized before
being signed and the name of the canonicalization algorithm is stored, together with the
signature. This enables the same algorithm to be used when the signature is validated.
The canonical form is a standard serialization of XML as a stream of bytes. It adds
default attributes and removes superfluous schemas, putting the attributes and schema
declarations in lexicographic order in each element. It uses a standard form for line
breaks and the UTF-8 encoding for characters. Any two equivalent XML documents
have the same canonical form.
When a subset of an XML document – say an element – is canonicalized, the
canonical form includes the ancestor context, that is, the namespaces declared and the
values of the attributes. Thus when canonical XML is used in conjunction with digital
signatures, the signature of an element will not pass its validation if that element is
placed in a different context.
A variation of this algorithm, called Exclusive Canonical XML, omits the context
from the serialization. This could be used if the application intends a particular signed
element to be used in different contexts.
Use of digital signatures in XML • The specification for digital signatures in XML
[www.w3.org XII] is a W3C recommendation that defines new XML element types to
hold signatures, the names of algorithms, keys and references to signed information. The
names provided in this specification are defined in the XML Signature schema which


===== page 428 =====
410 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Figure 9.17 Algorithms required for XML encryption (the algorithms in Figure 9.16 are also required)
Type of algorithm Name of algorithm Required reference
Block cipher TRIPLEDES, (cid:3) Required Section 11.3.1
AES-128, AES-256
AES-192 Optional
Encoding base64 Required [Freed and Borenstein 1996]
Key transport RSA-v1.5, (cid:3) Required Section 11.3.2
RSA-OAEP [Kaliski and Staddon 1998]
Symmetric key wrap (cid:3) TRIPLEDES Required [Housley 2002]
(signature by KeyWrap, (cid:3)
shared key) AES-128 KeyWrap, (cid:3)
AES-256KeyWrap
AES-192 KeyWrap Optional
Key agreement Diffie-Hellman Optional [Rescorla, 1999]
includes the elements Signature,SignatureValue, SignedInfo and KeyInfo.Figure 9.16
shows the algorithms that must be available in an implementation of XML Signature.
Key management service • The specification of the XML key management service
[www.w3.org XIII] contains protocols for distributing and registering public keys for
use in XML signatures. Although it does not require any particular public key
infrastructure, the service is designed to be compatible with existing ones, for example,
X.509 certificates (Section 11.4.4), SPKI (the Simple Public Key Infrastructure, Section
11.4.4) or PGP key identifiers (Pretty Good Privacy, Section 11.5.2).
Clients can use this service to find the public key of a person. For example, if Alice
wants to send an encrypted email to Bob, she can use this service to obtain his public
key. In another example, Bob receives a signed document from Alice containing her
X.509 certificate and then asks the key information service to extract the public key.
XML encryption • The standard for encryption in XML is defined in a W3C
recommendation that specifies both the way to represent encrypted data in XML and the
process for encrypting and decrypting it [www.w3.org XIV]. It introduces an
EncryptedData element for enclosing portions of encrypted data.
Figure 9.17 specifies the encryption algorithms that should be included in an
implementation of XML encryption. Block cipher algorithms are used for encrypting the
data, and base64 encoding is used in XML for representing digital signatures and
encrypted data. Key transport algorithms are public key encryption algorithms designed
for use in encrypting and decrypting the keys themselves.
Symmetric key wrap algorithms are shared secret key encryption algorithms
designed for encrypting and decrypting symmetric keys by means of another key. This
could be used if a key were to be included in a KeyInfo element.
A key agreement algorithm allows a shared secret key to be derived from a
computation on a pair of public keys. This algorithm is made available for use by
applications that need to agree a shared key without any exchange. It is not applied by
the XML security system itself.


===== page 429 =====
SECTION 9.6 COORDINATION OF WEB SERVICES 411
Figure 9.18 Travel agent scenario
1. The client asks the travel agent service for information about a set of services; for
example, flights, car hire and hotel bookings.
2. The travel agent service collects prices and availability information and sends it
to the client, which chooses one of the following on behalf of the user:
(a) Refine the query, possibly involving more providers to get more information,
then repeat step 2.
(b) Make reservation.
(c) Quit.
3. The client requests a reservation and the travel agent service checks availability.
4. Either all are available;
or for services that are not available;
either alternatives are offered to the client, which goes back to step 3;
or the client goes back to step 1.
5. Take deposit.
6. Give the client a reservation number as a confirmation.
7. During the period until the final payment, the client may modify or cancel
reservations.
9.6 Coordination of web services
The SOAP infrastructure supports single request-response interactions between clients
and web services. However, many useful applications involve several requests that need
to be done in a particular order. For example, when booking a flight, the price and
availability information is collected before the reservations are made. When a user
interacts with web pages by means of a browser, for example, to book a flight or to make
a bid in an auction, the interface provided by the browser (which is based on the
information provided by the server) controls the sequence in which the operations are
performed.
However, if it is a web service that is making reservations, like the travel agent
service shown in Figure 9.2, that web service needs to work from a description of the
appropriate way to proceed when interacting with other services are used for, e.g., car
hire and hotel bookings as well as flight bookings. Figure 9.18 shows an example of such
a description.
This example illustrates the need for web services as clients to be provided with a
description of a particular protocol to follow when interacting with other web services.
But there is also the issue of maintaining consistency in the server data when it is
receiving and responding to requests from multiple clients. Chapters 16 and 17 discuss
transactions, illustrating the issues by means of a series of banking transactions. As a


===== page 430 =====
412 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
simple example, in a transfer of money between two bank accounts, consistency requires
that both the deposit in one account and the withdrawal from the other must be
performed. Chapter 17 presents the two-phase commit protocol that is used by
cooperating servers to ensure consistency of transactions.
In some cases, atomic transactions suit the requirements of applications using web
services. However, activities such as those of the travel agent take a long time to
complete, and it would be impractical to use a two-phase commit protocol to carry them
out because it involves keeping resources locked for long periods of time. An alternative
is to use a more relaxed protocol in which each participant makes changes to persistent
state as they occur. In the case of failure, an application-level protocol is used to undo
these actions.
In conventional middleware, the infrastructure provides a simple request-reply
protocol, leaving other services such as transactions, persistency and security to be
implemented as separate higher-level services that can be used when they are needed.
The same is true for web services, where the W3C and others have been putting in effort
towards the definition of higher-level services.
Work has been done on a general model for coordination of web services, which
is similar to the distributed transaction model described in Section 17.2 in that it has
coordinator and participant roles that are able to act out particular protocols, for
example, to carry out a distributed transaction. This work, which is called WS-
Coordination, is described by Langworthy [2004]. The same group has also shown how
transactions may be carried out within this model. For a comprehensive study of web
services coordination protocols, see Alonso et al. [2004].
In the remainder of this section, we outline the ideas behind web service
choreography. Consider the fact that it would be possible to describe all of the possible
valid alternative paths through the set of interactions between pairs of web services
working together in a joint task such as the travel agent scenario. If such a description
were available, it could be used as an aid to the coordination of joint tasks. It could also
be used as a specification to be followed by new instances of a service, such as a new
flight booking service wishing to join a collaboration.
The W3C uses the term choreography to refer to a language based on WSDL for
defining coordination. For example, the language might specify constraints on the order
and the conditions in which messages are exchanged by participants. A choreography is
intended to provide a global description of a set of interactions, showing the behaviour
of each member of a set of participants, with a view to enhancing interoperability.
Requirements for choreography • Choreography is intended to support interactions
between web services which are generally managed by different companies and
organizations. A collaboration involving multiple web services and clients should be
described in terms of the sets of observable interactions between pairs of them. Such a
description might be seen as a contract between the participants, and could be used for
the following purposes:
(cid:129) to generate code outlines for a new service that wants to participate;
(cid:129) as a basis for generating test messages for a new service;
(cid:129) to promote a common understanding of the collaboration;
(cid:129) to analyze the collaboration, for example to identify possible deadlock situations.


===== page 431 =====
SECTION 9.7 APPLICATIONS OF WEB SERVICES 413
The use of a common choreography description by a set of collaborating web services
should result in more robust services with better interoperability. In addition, it should
be easier to develop and to introduce new services, making the overall service more
useful.
The W3C working draft document [www.w3.org XV] suggests that a
choreography language should include the following features:
(cid:129) hierarchical and recursive composition of choreographies;
(cid:129) the ability to add new instances of an existing service and new services;
(cid:129) concurrent paths, alternative paths and the ability to repeat a section of a
choreography;
(cid:129) variable timeouts – for example, different periods for holding reservations;
(cid:129) exceptions, for example, to deal with messages arriving out of sequence and user
actions such as cancellations;
(cid:129) asynchronous interactions (callbacks);
(cid:129) reference passing, for example, to allow a car hire company to consult a bank for
a credit check on behalf of a user;
(cid:129) marking of the boundaries of the separate transactions that take place, for
example, to allow for recovery;
(cid:129) the ability to include human-readable documentation.
A model based on these requirements is described in another W3C working draft
document [www.w3.org XVI].
Languages for choreography • The intention is to produce a declarative, XML-based
language for defining choreographies that can make use of WSDL definitions. The W3C
has made a recommendation for Web Services Choreography Definition Language
Version 1 [www.w3.org XVII]. Prior to this, a group of companies submitted to the
W3C a specification for the web services choreography interface [www.w3.org XVIII].
9.7 Applications of web services
Web services are now one of the dominant paradigms for programming distributed
systems. In this section, we discuss a number of the major areas where web services have
been employed extensively: in supporting service-oriented architecture, the Grid and
latterly, cloud computing.
9.7.1 Service-oriented architecture
Service-oriented architecture (SOA) is a set of design principles whereby distributed
systems are developed using sets of loosely coupled services that can be dynamically
discovered and then communicate with each other or are coordinated through
choreography to provide enhanced services. Service-oriented architecture is an abstract


===== page 432 =====
414 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
concept that can be implemented using a variety of technologies including the
distributed object or component-based approaches discussed in Chapter 8. The principal
means of realizing service-oriented architecture, however, is through the use of web
services, largely due to the loose coupling inherent in this approach (as discussed in
Section9.2).
This style of architecture can be used within a business or organization to offer a
flexible software architecture and to achieve interoperability between the various
services. Its prime use, however is in the broader Internet, offering a common view of
services making them globally accessible and amenable to subsequent composition.
This makes it possible to transcend the levels of heterogeneity inherent in the Internet
and also to deal with the problem of different organizations adopting different
middleware products internally – it is possible for one organization to use CORBA
internally and another to use .NET but both then to expose interfaces using web services,
thus encouraging global interoperability. The resultant property is known as business-
to-business (B2B) integration. We already saw one example of the need for B2B
integration in Figure 9.18 (the travel agent scenario), where the travel agent may deal
with a wide range of companies offering flights, car rentals and hotel accommodation.
Service-oriented architecture also enables and encourages a mashup approach to
software development. A mashup is a new service created by a third-party developer by
combining two or more services available in the distributed environment. The mashup
culture relies on the ready availability of useful services with well-defined interfaces
coupled with an open innovation community where individuals or groups engage in the
development of experimental combined services and make them available to others for
further development. Both conditions are now met by the Internet, particularly with the
emergence of cloud computing and software as a service (as introduced in Section
7.7.1), where major software developers such as Amazon, Flickr and eBay make
services available through published interfaces to other developers. As an example, refer
to JBidwatcher [www.jbidwatcher.org], a Java-based mashup that interfaces to eBay to
manage bids proactively on behalf of a client, for example tracking auctions and bidding
at the last minute to maximize chances of success.
9.7.2 The Grid
The name ‘Grid’ is used to refer to middleware that is designed to enable the sharing of
resources such as files, computers, software, data and sensors on a very large scale. The
resources are shared typically by groups of users in different organizations who are
collaborating on the solution of problems requiring large numbers of computers to solve
them, either by the sharing of data or by the sharing of computing power. These
resources are necessarily supported by heterogeneous computer hardware, operating
systems, programming languages and applications. Management is needed to coordinate
the use of resources to ensure that clients get what they need and that services can afford
to supply it. In some cases, sophisticated security techniques are required to ensure that
the correct use is made of resources in this type of environment. For an example of a
Grid application, refer to the box on page 415, which features the World-Wide
Telescope application developed at Microsoft Research.


===== page 433 =====
SECTION 9.7 APPLICATIONS OF WEB SERVICES 415
The World-Wide Telescope: A Grid application
This project is concerned with deploying the data resources shared by the
astronomy community. It is described in the work of Szalay and Gray [2004], Szalay
and Gray [2001] and Gray and Szalay [2002]. Astronomy data consists of archives of
observations, each of which covers a particular period of time, a part of the
electromagnetic spectrum (optical, x-ray, radio) and a particular area of the sky.
These observations are made by different instruments deployed at various places
throughout the world.
A study of how astronomers share their data is useful for deriving the
characteristics of a typical Grid application, because astronomers freely share their
results with one another and issues of security can be omitted, making this discussion
simpler.
Astronomers make studies that need to combine data on the same celestial
objects but involve several different periods of time and multiple parts of the
spectrum. The ability to use independent observations of data is important to
research. Visualization allows astronomers to see the data as 2D or 3D scatter plots.
The teams gathering the data store it in immense archives (currently terabytes),
which are managed locally by each team that gathers data. The instruments used in
gathering data are subject to Moore’s law, so the amount of data gathered grows
exponentially. As it is gathered, the data is analyzed by a pipeline process and stored
as derived data for use by astronomers throughout the world. But before data can be
used by other researchers, scientists working in a particular field need to agree on a
common way of labelling their data.
Szalay and Gray [2004] point out that in the past, scientific research data was
included by authors in articles and published in journals that lived in libraries. But
nowadays, the quantity of data is too great to be included in a publication. This
applies not only to astronomy, but also to the fields of particle physics and genome
and biology research. The role of author now belongs to the collaborations, which
take 5–10 years to build their experiments before producing the data that is published
to the world in web-based archives. Thus, the scientists working on the projects
become data publishers and librarians as well as authors.
This additional role requires any project that manages a data archive to make it
accessible to other researchers. This implies a considerable overhead in addition to
the original task of data analysis. To make such sharing possible, the raw data
requires metadata to describe, for example, the time it was collected, the part of the
sky and the instrument used. In addition, the derived data needs to be accompanied
by metadata describing the parameters of the pipelines through which it was
processed.
The calculation of derived data requires heavy computational support. It often
has to be recalculated as techniques improve. All of this is a considerable expense for
the project that owns the data.
The aim of the World-Wide Telescope is to unify the world’s astronomy
archives into a giant database containing astronomy literature, images, raw data,
derived datasets and simulation data.


===== page 434 =====
416 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
Requirements of Grid applications • The World-Wide Telescope is typical of a range of
data-intensive Grid applications, wherein:
(cid:129) data is collected by means of scientific instruments;
(cid:129) the data is stored in archives at separate sites whose locations can be in different
places throughout the world;
(cid:129) the data is managed by teams of scientists belonging to separate organizations;
(cid:129) an immense and increasing quantity (terabytes or petabytes) of raw data is
generated from the instruments;
(cid:129) computer programs are used to analyze and make summaries of the raw data, for
example, to classify, calibrate and catalogue the raw data representing celestial
objects.
The Internet makes all of these data archives potentially available to scientists
throughout the world, enabling them to get data from different instruments gathered at
different times and at different sites. However, a particular scientist using this data for
their own research will be interested in just a subset of the objects in the archives.
The immense quantity of data in an archive makes it infeasible to transfer it to the
location of the user before processing it to extract the objects of interest, due to
considerations such as transmission time and the local disk space required. Therefore, it
is not appropriate to use FTP or web access in this context. The processing of the raw
data should take place at the location where it is collected and stored in a database. Then
when a scientist makes a query about particular objects, the information in each database
should be analyzed and if necessary, visualizations produced before returning the results
to the remote query.
The fact that data is processed at many different sites provides an inbuilt
parallelism that effectively divides the immense task being undertaken.
From the above characteristics, the following requirements are derived:
R1: Remote access to resources – that is, to the required information in the archives.
R2: Processing of data at the site where it is stored and managed, either when it is
gathered or in response to a request. A typical query might result in a
visualization based on data collected for one region of sky recorded by different
instruments at different times. It will involve selecting a small quantity of data
from each massive data archive.
R3: The resource manager of a data archive should be able to create service instances
dynamically to deal with the particular section of data required, just as in the
distributed object model, where servants are created whenever they are needed
to handle different resources managed by a service.
R4: Metadata to describe:
– characteristics of the data in an archive – for example, for astronomy, the area
of the sky, the date and time collected and the instruments used;
– characteristics of a service managing that data – for example, its cost, its
geographic location, its publisher or its load or space available.


===== page 435 =====
SECTION 9.7 APPLICATIONS OF WEB SERVICES 417
R5: Directory services based on the above metadata.
R6: Software to manage queries, data transfers and advance reservation of resources,
taking into account that the resources are generally managed by the projects that
generate the data and that access to them may need to be rationed.
Web services can deal with the first two requirements by providing a convenient way
for scientists to access operations on data in remote archives. This will require that each
particular application provide a service description that includes a set of methods for
accessing its data. The Grid middleware must deal with the remaining requirements.
Grids are also used for computationally intensive Grid applications such as
processing the vast quantities of data produced by the CMS high-energy particle accel-
erator at CERN [www.uscms.org], testing the effects of candidate drug molecules
[Taufer et al. 2003, Chien 2004] or supporting massively multiplayer online games us-
ing spare capacity in cluster computers [www.butterfly.net]. Where computationally-in-
tensive applications are deployed on a Grid, resource management will be concerned
with allocating computing resources and balancing loads.
Finally, security will be needed for many Grid applications. For example, the Grid
is in use for medical research and for business applications. Even when the privacy of
data is not an issue, it will be important to establish the identity of the people who
created the data.
Grid middleware • The Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) is a standard for
Grid-based applications [Foster et al. 2001, 2002]. It provides a framework within
which the above requirements can be met, based on web services. Resources are
managed by application-specific Grid services. The Globus toolkit then implements the
architecture.
The Globus Project started in 1994 with a view to providing software that
integrates and standardizes the functions required by a family of scientific applications.
These functions include directory services, security and resource management. The first
Globus toolkit appeared in 1997. The OGSA evolved from the second version of the
toolkit (called GT2), which is described in Foster and Kesselman [2004]. The third
version (GT3), which appeared in 2002, was based on OGSA and therefore built on web
services. It was developed by the Globus Alliance (www.globus.org) and is described in
Sandholm and Gawor [2003]. Since then, two further versions have been released – the
latest version is referred to as GT5 and is available as open source software
[www.globus.org]).
A case study of OGSA and the Globus toolkit (up to GT3) can be found on the
companion web site [www.cdk5.net/web].
9.7.3 Cloud computing
Cloud computing was introduced in Chapter 1 as a set of Internet-based application,
storage and computing services sufficient to support most users’ needs, thus enabling
them to largely or totally dispense with local data storage and application software.
Cloud computing also promotes a view of everything as a service, from physical or
virtual infrastructure through to software, often paid for on a per-usage basis rather than
purchased. The concept is therefore intrinsically linked to a new business model for


===== page 436 =====
418 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
computing where cloud suppliers offer a range of computational, data and other services
to customers as required for their daily use, for example offering sufficient storage
capacity across the Internet to act as an archival or backup service.
Chapter 1 also comments on the overlap between cloud computing and the Grid.
The development of the Grid preceded the emergence of cloud computing and was a
significant factor in its emergence. They share the same goal of providing resources
(services) out there in the greater Internet. Whereas the Grid tends to focus on high-end
data-heavy or computationally expensive applications, cloud computation is more
general, offering a range of services for individual computer users through to high-end
users. The business model associated with cloud computing is also a distinguishing
characteristic. It is therefore fair to say that the Grid is an early example of cloud
computing, but cloud computing has developed significantly since then.
With the view of everything as a service, web services offer a natural
implementation path for cloud computing, and indeed many vendors go down this path.
The most notable offering in this space is Amazon Web Services (AWS)
[aws.amazon.com], and we look briefly at this technology below. We will see an
alternative approach to cloud computing in Chapter 21, when we look at Google
infrastructure and the associated Google App Engine, which both feature a lighter-
weight, higher-performance approach than web services.
Amazon Web Services are a set of cloud services implemented on the extensive
physical infrastructure owned by Amazon.com. Originally developed for internal
purposes in support of their electronic retail business, Amazon now offers many of the
facilities to external users, enabling them to run independent services on the
infrastructure. The implementation of AWS takes care of key distributed systems issues
such as managing service availability, scalability and performance, allowing developers
to focus on the use of their services. Services are made available using web service
standards described earlier in this chapter. This has the advantage that programmers
familiar with web services can readily use AWS and can develop mashups that
incorporate Amazon Web Services in their construction. More generally, the approach
enables interoperability across the Internet. Amazon also adopts the REST approach, as
advocated by Fielding [2000] and discussed in Section 9.2.
Amazon offers a wide and extensible set of services, the most significant of which
are listed in Figure 9.19. We feature EC2 in more detail. EC2 is an elastic compute
service, where the term ‘elastic’ refers to the ability to offer computing capacity that is
resizeable to the customers needs. Rather than an actual machine, EC2 offers the user a
virtual machine, called an instance, to their desired specification. For example, a user
can request an instance of the following types:
(cid:129) astandard instance designed to be suitable for most applications;
(cid:129) ahigh-memory instance that offers additional memory capacity, for example for
applications involving caching;
(cid:129) ahigh-CPU instance designed to support computationally intensive tasks;
(cid:129) a cluster compute instance offering a cluster of virtual processors with high-
bandwidth interconnection for high-performance computing tasks.


===== page 437 =====
SECTION 9.8 SUMMARY 419
Figure 9.19 A selection of Amazon Web Services
Web service Description
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) Web-based service offering access to virtual
machines of a given performance and storage
capacity
Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) Web-based storage service for unstructured data
Amazon Simple DB Web-based storage service for querying
structured data
Amazon Simple Queue Service (SQS) Hosted service supporting message queuing (as
discussed in Chapter 6)
Amazon Elastic MapReduce Web-based service for distributed computation
using the MapReduce model (introduced in
Chapter 21)
Amazon Flexible Payments Service (FPS) Web-based service supporting electronic
payments
Several of these can be further refined – for example, for a standard instance it is
possible to request a small, medium or large instance representing different
specifications in terms of processing power, memory, disk storage and so on.
EC2 is built on top of the Xen hypervisor, described in Section 7.7.2. The
instances can be configured to run a variety of operating systems including Windows
Server 2008, Linux or OpenSolaris. They can also be configured with a variety of
software. For example, it is possible to request an installation of Apache HTTP to
support web hosting.
EC2 supports the interesting concept of an elastic IP address, which looks like a
traditional IP address but is associated with the user’s account, not a particular instance.
This means that if a (virtual) machine fails, the IP address can be reassigned to a
different machine without requiring the intervention of a network administrator.
9.8 Summary
In this chapter we have shown that web services have arisen from the need to provide an
infrastructure to support interworking between different organizations. This infrastruc-
ture generally uses the widely used HTTP protocol to transport messages between cli-
ents and servers over the Internet and is based on the use of URIs to refer to resources.
XML,a textual format, is used for data representation and marshalling.
Two separate influences led to the emergence of web services. One of these was
the addition of service interfaces to web servers with a view to allowing the resources
on a site to be accessed by client programs other than browsers and using a richer form


===== page 438 =====
420 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
of interaction. The other was the desire to provide something like RPC over the Internet,
based on the existing protocols. The resulting web services provide interfaces with sets
of operations that can be called remotely. Like any other form of service, a web service
can be the client of another web service, thus allowing a web service to integrate or
combine a set of other web services.
SOAP is the communication protocol that is generally used by web services and
their clients. It can be used to transmit request messages and their replies between client
and server, either by the asynchronous exchange of documents or by a form of request-
reply protocol based on a pair of asynchronous message exchanges. In both cases, the
request or reply message is enclosed in an XML-formatted document called an
envelope. The SOAP envelope is generally transmitted over the synchronous HTTP
protocol, although other transports can be used.
XML and SOAP processors are available for all of the widely used programming
languages and operating systems. This enables web services and their clients to be
deployed almost anywhere. This form of interworking is enabled by the facts that web
services are not tied to any particular programming language and do not support the
distributed object model.
In conventional middleware services, interface definitions provide clients with the
details of services. However, in the case of web services, service descriptions are used.
A service description specifies the communication protocol to be used (for example,
SOAP) and the URI of the service, as well as describing its interface. The interface may
be described either as a set of operations or as a set of messages to be exchanged between
client and server.
XML security was designed to provide the necessary protection for the contents
of a document exchanged by members of a group of people, who have different tasks to
perform on that document. Different parts of the document will be available to different
people, some with the ability to add to or alter the content and others only to read it. To
enable complete flexibility in its future use, the security properties are defined within the
document itself. This is achieved by means of XML, which is a self-describing format.
XML elements are used to specify document parts that are encrypted or signed as well
as details of the algorithms used and information to help with finding keys.
Web services have been used for a variety of purposes in distributed systems. For
example, web services provide a natural implementation of the concept of service-
oriented architecture, in which their loose coupling enables interoperability in Internet-
scale applications – including business-to-business (B2B) applications. Their inherent
loose coupling also supports the emergence of a mashup approach to web service
construction. Web services also underpin the Grid, supporting collaborations between
scientists or engineers in organizations in different parts of the world. Their work is very
often based on the use of raw data collected by instruments at different sites and then
processed locally. The Globus toolkit is an implementation of the architecture that has
been used in a variety of data-intensive and computationally intensive applications.
Finally, web services are heavily used in cloud computing. For example Amazon’s
AWS is based entirely on web service standards coupled with the REST philosophy of
service construction.


===== page 439 =====
EXERCISES 421
EXERCISES
9.1 Compare the request-reply protocol as described in Section 5.2 with the implementation
of client-server communication in SOAP. State two reasons why the use of
asynchronous messages by SOAP is more appropriate over the Internet. To what extent
does the use of HTTP by SOAP reduce the difference between the two approaches?(cid:3)
page 388
9.2 Compare the structure of URLs as used for web services with that of remote object
references as specified in Section 4.3.4. State in each case how they are used to execute
a client request. page 393
9.3 Illustrate the contents of a SOAP Request message and corresponding Reply message in
the Election service example of Exercise 5.11, using the pictorial version of XML as
shown in Figure 9.4 and Figure 9.5. page 389
9.4 Outline the five main elements of a WSDL service description. In the case of the
Election service defined in Exercise 5.11, state the type of information to be used by the
Request and Reply messages – does any of this need to be included in the target
namespace? For the vote operation, draw diagrams similar to Figure 9.11 and Figure
9.13. page 402
9.5 Continuing with the example of the Election service, explain why the part of the WSDL
service description defined in Exercise 9.4 is referred to as ‘abstract’. What would need
to be added to the service description to make it completely concrete? page 400
9.6 Define a Java interface for the Election service suitable for use as a web service. State
why you think the interface you defined is suitable. Explain how a WSDL document for
the service is generated and how it is made available to clients. page 396
9.7 Describe the contents of a Java client proxy for the Election service. Explain how the
appropriate marshalling and unmarshalling methods can be obtained for a static proxy.
page 396
9.8 Explain the role of a servlet container in the deploying of a web service and the
execution of a client request. page 396
9.9 In the Java example illustrated in Figure 9.8 and Figure 9.9, both client and server are
dealing with objects, although web services do not support distributed objects. How can
this be the case? What are the limitations imposed on the interfaces of Java web
services? page 395
9.10 Outline the replication scheme used in UDDI. Supposing that vector timestamps are
used to support this scheme, define a pair of operations for use by registries needing to
exchange data. page 406
9.11 Explain why UDDI can be described as being both a name service and a directory
service, mentioning the types of enquiries that can be made. The second ‘D’ in the name
UDDI refers to ‘discovery’ – is UDDI really a discovery service?(cid:3)
Chapter 13 and page 404


===== page 440 =====
422 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
9.12 Outline the main difference between TLS and XML security. Explain why XML is
particularly suitable for the role it plays, in terms of these differences. (cid:3)
Chapter 11 and page 406
9.13 Documents protected by XML security may be signed or encrypted long before anyone
can predict who will be the ultimate recipients. What measures are taken to ensure that
the latter have access to the algorithms used by the former? page 406
9.14 Explain the relevance of canonical XML to digital signatures. What contextual
information can be included in the canonical form? Give an example of a breach of
security where the context is omitted from the canonical form. page 409
9.15 A coordination protocol could be carried out in order to coordinate the actions of web
services. Outline an architecture for (i) a centralized and (ii) a distributed coordination
protocol. In each case, describe the interactions needed to establish coordination
between a pair of web services. page 411
9.16 Compare RPC call semantics with the semantics of WS-ReliableMessaging:
i) State the entities to which each refers.
ii) Compare the differing meanings of the available semantics (for example, at-
least-once,at-most-once,exactly-once).
Chapter 5 and page 392


===== page 441 =====
10
PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Napster and its legacy
10.3 Peer-to-peer middleware
10.4 Routing overlays
10.5 Overlay case studies: Pastry, Tapestry
10.6 Application case studies: Squirrel, OceanStore, Ivy
10.7 Summary
Peer-to-peer systems represent a paradigm for the construction of distributed systems
and applications in which data and computational resources are contributed by many
hosts on the Internet, all of which participate in the provision of a uniform service. Their
emergence is a consequence of the very rapid growth of the Internet, embracing many
millions of computers and similar numbers of users requiring access to shared resources.
A key problem for peer-to-peer systems is the placement of data objects across
many hosts and subsequent provision for access to them in a manner that balances the
workload and ensures availability without adding undue overheads. We describe several
recently developed systems and applications that are designed to achieve this.
Peer-to-peer middleware systems are emerging that have the capacity to share
computing resources, storage and data present in computers ‘at the edges of the Internet’
on a global scale. They exploit existing naming, routing, data replication and security
techniques in new ways to build a reliable resource-sharing layer over an unreliable and
untrusted collection of computers and networks.
Peer-to-peer applications have been used to provide file sharing, web caching,
information distribution and other services, exploiting the resources of tens of thousands
of machines across the Internet. They are at their most effective when used to store very
large collections of immutable data. Their design diminishes their effectiveness for
applications that store and update mutable data objects.
423


===== page 442 =====
424 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
10.1 Introduction
The demand for services in the Internet can be expected to grow to a scale that is limited
only by the size of the world’s population. The goal of peer-to-peer systems is to enable
the sharing of data and resources on a very large scale by eliminating any requirement
for separately managed servers and their associated infrastructure.
The scope for expanding popular services by adding to the number of the
computers hosting them is limited when all the hosts must be owned and managed by
the service provider. Administration and fault recovery costs tend to dominate. The
network bandwidth that can be provided to a single server site over available physical
links is also a major constraint. System-level services such as Sun NFS (Section 12.3),
the Andrew File System (Section 12.4) or video servers (Section 20.6.1) and
application-level services such as Google, Amazon or eBay all exhibit this problem to
varying degrees.
Peer-to-peer systems aim to support useful distributed services and applications
using data and computing resources available in the personal computers and
workstations that are present in the Internet and other networks in ever-increasing
numbers. This is increasingly attractive as the performance difference between desktop
and server machines narrows and broadband network connections proliferate.
But there is another, broader aim: one author [Shirky 2000] has defined peer-to-
peer applications as ‘applications that exploit resources available at the edges of the
Internet – storage, cycles, content, human presence’. Each type of resource sharing
mentioned in that definition is already represented by distributed applications available
for most types of personal computer. The purpose of this chapter is to describe some
general techniques that simplify the construction of peer-to-peer applications and
enhance their scalability, reliability and security.
Traditional client-server systems manage and provide access to resources such as
files, web pages or other information objects located on a single server computer or a
small cluster of tightly coupled servers. With such centralized designs, few decisions are
required about the placement of the resources or the management of server hardware
resources, but the scale of the service is limited by the server hardware capacity and
network connectivity. Peer-to-peer systems provide access to information resources
located on computers throughout a network (whether it be the Internet or a corporate
network). Algorithms for the placement and subsequent retrieval of information objects
are a key aspect of the system design. The aim is to deliver a service that is fully
decentralized and self-organizing, dynamically balancing the storage and processing
loads between all the participating computers as computers join and leave the service.
Peer-to-peer systems share these characteristics:
• Their design ensures that each user contributes resources to the system.
• Although they may differ in the resources that they contribute, all the nodes in a
peer-to-peer system have the same functional capabilities and responsibilities.
• Their correct operation does not depend on the existence of any centrally
administered systems.


===== page 443 =====
SECTION 10.1 INTRODUCTION 425
• They can be designed to offer a limited degree of anonymity to the providers and
users of resources.
• A key issue for their efficient operation is the choice of an algorithm for the
placement of data across many hosts and subsequent access to it in a manner that
balances the workload and ensures availability without adding undue overheads.
Computers and network connections owned and managed by a multitude of different
users and organizations are necessarily volatile resources; their owners do not guarantee
to keep them switched on, connected and fault-free. So the availability of the processes
and computers participating in peer-to-peer systems is unpredictable. Peer-to-peer
services therefore cannot rely on guaranteed access to individual resources, although
they can be designed to make the probability of failure to access a copy of a replicated
object arbitrarily small. It is worth noting that this weakness of peer-to-peer systems can
be turned into a strength if the replication of resources that it calls for is exploited to
achieve a degree of resistance to tampering by malicious nodes (for example, through
Byzantine fault-tolerance techniques; see Chapter 18).
Several early Internet-based services, including DNS (Section 13.2.3) and
Netnews/Usenet [Kantor and Lapsley 1986], adopted a multi-server scalable and fault-
tolerant architecture. The Xerox Grapevine name registration and mail delivery service
[Birrell et al. 1982, Schroeder et al. 1984] provides an interesting early example of a
scalable, fault-tolerant distributed service. Lamport’s part-time parliament algorithm for
distributed consensus [Lamport 1989], the Bayou replicated storage system (see Section
18.4.2) and the classless interdomain IP routing algorithm (see Section 3.4.3) are all
examples of distributed algorithms for the placement or location of information and can
be considered as antecedents of peer-to-peer systems.
But the potential for the deployment of peer-to-peer services using resources at the
edges of the Internet emerged only when a significant number of users had acquired
always-on, broadband connections to the network, making their desktop computers
suitable platforms for resource sharing. This occurred first in the United States around
1999. By mid-2004 the worldwide number of broadband Internet connections had
comfortably exceeded 100 million [Internet World Stats 2004].
Three generations of peer-to-peer system and application development can be
identified. The first generation was launched by the Napster music exchange service
[OpenNap 2001], which we describe in the next section. A second generation of file-
sharing applications offering greater scalability, anonymity and fault tolerance quickly
followed including Freenet [Clarke et al. 2000, freenetproject.org], Gnutella, Kazaa
[Leibowitz et al. 2003] and BitTorrent [Cohen 2003].
Peer-to-peer middleware • The third generation is characterized by the emergence of
middleware layers for the application-independent management of distributed resources
on a global scale. Several research teams have now completed the development,
evaluation and refinement of peer-to-peer middleware platforms and demonstrated or
deployed them in a range of application services. The best-known and most fully
developed examples include Pastry [Rowstron and Druschel 2001], Tapestry [Zhao et
al. 2004], CAN [Ratnasamy et al. 2001], Chord [Stoica et al. 2001] and Kademlia
[Maymounkov and Mazieres 2002].


===== page 444 =====
426 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.1 Distinctions between IP and overlay routing for peer-to-peer applications
IP Application-level routing overlay
Scale IPv4 is limited to 232 addressable
nodes. The IPv6 namespace is much Peer-to-peer systems can address
more generous (2128), but addresses more objects. The GUID namespace
in both versions are hierarchically is very large and flat (>2128),
structured and much of the space is allowing it to be much more fully
preallocated according to occupied.
administrative requirements.
Load balancing Loads on routers are determined by Object locations can be randomized
network topology and associated and hence traffic patterns are
traffic patterns. divorced from the network topology.
Network dynamics IP routing tables are updated
Routing tables can be updated
(addition/deletion of asynchronously on a best-effort basis
synchronously or asynchronously
objects/nodes) with time constants on the order of 1
with fractions-of-a-second delays.
hour.
Fault tolerance Redundancy is designed into the IP
network by its managers, ensuring Routes and object references can be
tolerance of a single router or replicatedn-fold, ensuring tolerance
network connectivity failure. n-fold ofn failures of nodes or connections.
replication is costly.
Target identification Each IP address maps to exactly one Messages can be routed to the nearest
target node. replica of a target object.
Security and Addressing is only secure when all Security can be achieved even in
anonymity nodes are trusted. Anonymity for the environments with limited trust. A
owners of addresses is not limited degree of anonymity can be
achievable. provided.
These platforms are designed to place resources (data objects, files) on a set of
computers that are widely distributed throughout the Internet and to route messages to
them on behalf of clients, relieving clients of any need to make decisions about placing
resources and to hold information about the whereabouts of the resources they require.
Unlike the second-generation systems, they provide guarantees of delivery for requests
in a bounded number of network hops. They place replicas of resources on available host
computers in a structured manner, taking account of their volatile availability, their
variable trustworthiness and requirements for load balancing and locality of information
storage and use.
Resources are identified by globally unique identifiers (GUIDs), usually derived
as a secure hash (described in Section 11.4.3) from some or all of the resource’s state.
The use of a secure hash makes a resource ‘self certifying’ – clients receiving a resource
can check the validity of the hash. This protects it against tampering by untrusted nodes
on which it may be stored, but this technique requires that the states of resources are
immutable, since a change to the state would result in a different hash value. Hence peer-
to-peer storage systems are inherently best suited to the storage of immutable objects


===== page 445 =====
SECTION 10.1 INTRODUCTION 427
(such as music or video files). Their use for objects with changing values is more
challenging, but this can be accommodated by the addition of trusted servers to manage
a sequence of versions and identify the current version (as is done for example in
OceanStore and Ivy, described in Sections 10.6.2 and 10.6.3).
The use of peer-to-peer systems for applications that demand a high level of
availability for the objects stored requires careful application design to avoid situations
in which all of the replicas of an object are simultaneously unavailable. There is a risk
of this for objects stored on computers with the same ownership, geographic location,
administration, network connectivity, country or jurisdiction. The use of randomly
distributed GUIDs assists by distributing the object replicas to randomly located nodes
in the underlying network. If the underlying network spans many organizations across
the globe, then the risk of simultaneous unavailability is much reduced.
Overlay routing versus IP routing • At first sight, routing overlays share many
characteristics with the IP packet routing infrastructure that constitutes the primary
communication mechanism of the Internet (see Section 3.4.3). It is therefore legitimate
to ask why an additional application-level routing mechanism is required in peer-to-peer
systems. The answer lies in several distinctions that are identified in Figure 10.1. It may
be argued that some of these distinctions arise from the ‘legacy’ nature of IP as the
Internet’s primary protocol, but the legacy’s impact is too strong for it to be overcome
in order to support peer-to-peer applications more directly.
Distributed computation • The exploitation of spare computing power on end-user
computers has long been a subject of interest and experiment. Work with the first
personal computers at Xerox PARC [Shoch and Hupp 1982] showed the feasibility of
performing loosely coupled compute-intensive tasks by running background processes
on ~100 personal computers linked by a local network. More recently, much larger
numbers of computers have been put to use to perform several scientific calculations
that require almost unlimited quantities of computing power.
The most widely known effort of this type is the SETI@home project [Anderson
et al. 2002], which is part of a wider project called the Search for Extra-Terrestrial
Intelligence. SETI@home partitions a stream of digitized radio telescope data into 107-
second work units, each of about 350 kbytes and distributes them to client computers
whose computing power is contributed by volunteers. Each work unit is distributed
redundantly to 3–4 personal computers to guard against erroneous or malicious nodes
and is examined for significant signal patterns. The distribution of work units and the
coordination of results is handled by a single server that is responsible for
communication with all of the clients. Anderson et al. [2002] reported that 3.91 million
personal computers had participated in the SETI@home project by August 2002,
resulting in the processing of 221 million work units and representing an average 27.36
teraflops of computational power during the 12 months to July 2002. The work
completed to that date represented the largest single computation on record.
The SETI@home computation is unusual in that it does not involve any
communication or coordination between computers while they are processing the work
units; the results are communicated to a central server in a single short message that may
be delivered whenever the client and server are available. Some other scientific tasks of
this nature have been identified, including the search for large prime numbers and
attempts at brute-force decryption, but the unleashing of the computational power in the


===== page 446 =====
428 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.2 Napster: peer-to-peer file sharing with a centralized, replicated index
peers
Napster server Napster server
Index 1. File location Index
request
3. File request
2. List of peers
offering the file
5. Index update
4. File delivered
Internet for a broader range of tasks will depend upon the development of a distributed
platform that supports data sharing and the coordination of computation between
participating computers on a large scale. That is the goal of the Grid project, discussed
in Chapter 19.
In this chapter we focus on algorithms and systems developed to date for the
sharing of data in peer-to-peer networks. In Section 10.2 we summarize Napster’s
design and review the lessons learned from it. In Section 10.3 we describe the general
requirements for peer-to-peer middleware layers. The following sections cover the
design and application of peer-to-peer middleware platforms, starting with an abstract
specification in Section 10.4, followed by detailed descriptions of two fully developed
examples in Section 10.5 and some applications of them in Section 10.6.
10.2 Napster and its legacy
The first application in which a demand for a globally scalable information storage and
retrieval service emerged was the downloading of digital music files. Both the need for
and the feasibility of a peer-to-peer solution were first demonstrated by the Napster file-
sharing system [OpenNap 2001] which provided a means for users to share files.
Napster became very popular for music exchange soon after its launch in 1999. At its
peak, several million users were registered and thousands were swapping music files
simultaneously.
Napster’s architecture included centralized indexes, but users supplied the files,
which were stored and accessed on their personal computers. Napster’s method of
operation is illustrated by the sequence of steps shown in Figure 10.2. Note that in step5
clients are expected to add their own music files to the pool of shared resources by


===== page 447 =====
SECTION 10.2 NAPSTER AND ITS LEGACY 429
transmitting a link to the Napster indexing service for each available file. Thus the
motivation for Napster and the key to its success was the making available of a large,
widely distributed set of files to users throughout the Internet, fulfilling Shirky’s dictum
by providing access to ‘shared resources at the edges of the Internet’.
Napster was shut down as a result of legal proceedings instituted against the
operators of the Napster service by the owners of the copyright in some of the material
(i.e., digitally encoded music) that was made available on it (see the box below).
Anonymity for the receivers and the providers of shared data and other resources
is a concern for the designers of peer-to-peer systems. In systems with many nodes, the
routing of requests and results can be made sufficiently tortuous to conceal their source
and the contents of files can be distributed across multiple nodes, spreading the
responsibility for making them available. Mechanisms for anonymous communication
that are resistant to most forms of traffic analysis are available [Goldschlag et al. 1999].
If files are also encrypted before they are placed on servers, the owners of the servers
can plausibly deny any knowledge of the contents. But these anonymity techniques add
to the cost of resource sharing, and recent work has shown that the anonymity available
is weak against some attacks [Wright et al. 2002].
The Freenet [Clarke et al. 2000] and FreeHaven [Dingledine et al. 2000] projects
are focused on providing Internet-wide file services that offer anonymity for the
providers and users of the shared files. Ross Anderson has proposed the Eternity Service
[Anderson 1996], a storage service that provides long-term guarantees of data
Peer-to-peer systems and copyright ownership issues
The developers of Napster argued that they were not liable for the infringement of the
copyright owners’ rights because they were not participating in the copying process,
which was performed entirely between users’ machines. Their argument failed
because the index servers were deemed an essential part of the process. Since the
index servers were located at well-known addresses, their operators were unable to
remain anonymous and so could be targeted in lawsuits.
A more fully distributed file-sharing service might have achieved a better
separation of legal responsibilities, spreading the responsibility across all of the users
and thus making the pursuit of legal remedies very difficult, if not impossible.
Whatever view one takes about the legitimacy of file copying for the purpose of
sharing copyright-protected material, there are legitimate social and political
justifications for the anonymity of clients and servers in some application contexts.
The most persuasive justification arises when anonymity is used to overcome
censorship and maintain freedom of expression for individuals in oppressive
societies or organizations.
It is known that email and web sites have played a significant role in achieving
public awareness at times of political crisis in such societies; their role could be
strengthened if the authors could be protected by anonymity. ‘Whistle-blowing’ is a
related case: a ‘whistle-blower’ is an employee who publicizes or reports their
employer’s wrongdoings to authorities without revealing their own identity for fear
of sanctions or dismissal. In some circumstances it is reasonable for such an action
to be protected by anonymity.


===== page 448 =====
430 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
availability through resistance to all sorts of accidental data loss and denial of service
attacks. He bases the need for such a service on the observation that whereas publication
is a permanent state for printed information – it is virtually impossible to delete material
once it has been published and distributed to a few thousand libraries in diverse
organizations and jurisdictions around the world – electronic publications cannot easily
achieve the same level of resistance to censorship or suppression. Anderson covers the
technical and economic requirements to ensure the integrity of the store and also points
out that anonymity is often an essential requirement for the persistence of information,
since it provides the best defence against legal challenges, as well as illegal actions such
as bribes or attacks on the originators, owners or keepers of the data.
Lessons learned from Napster • Napster demonstrated the feasibility of building a
useful large-scale service that depends almost wholly on data and computers owned by
ordinary Internet users. To avoid swamping the computing resources of individual users
(for example, the first user to offer a chart-topping song) and their network connections,
Napster took account of network locality – the number of hops between the client and
the server – when allocating a server to a client requesting a song. This simple load-
distribution mechanism enabled the service to scale to meet the needs of large numbers
of users.
Limitations: Napster used a (replicated) unified index of all available music files. For the
application in question, the requirement for consistency between the replicas was not
strong, so this did not hamper performance, but for many applications it would
constitute a limitation. Unless the access path to the data objects is distributed, object
discovery and addressing are likely to become a bottleneck.
Application dependencies: Napster took advantage of the special characteristics of the
application for which it was designed in other ways:
• Music files are never updated, avoiding any need to make sure all the replicas of
files remain consistent after updates.
• No guarantees are required concerning the availability of individual files – if a
music file is temporarily unavailable, it can be downloaded later. This reduces the
requirement for dependability of individual computers and their connections to
the Internet.
10.3 Peer-to-peer middleware
A key problem in the design of peer-to-peer applications is providing a mechanism to
enable clients to access data resources quickly and dependably wherever they are
located throughout the network. Napster maintained a unified index of available files for
this purpose, giving the network addresses of their hosts. Second-generation peer-to-
peer file storage systems such as Gnutella and Freenet employ partitioned and
distributed indexes, but the algorithms used are specific to each system.
This location problem existed in several services that predate the peer-to-peer
paradigm as well. For example, Sun NFS addresses this need with the aid of a virtual file
system abstraction layer at each client that accepts requests to access files stored on


===== page 449 =====
SECTION 10.3 PEER-TO-PEER MIDDLEWARE 431
multiple servers in terms of virtual file references (i.e., v-nodes, see Section 12.3). This
solution relies on a substantial amount of preconfiguration at each client and manual
intervention when file distribution patterns or server provision changes. It is clearly not
scalable beyond a service managed by a single organization. AFS (Section 12.4) has
similar properties.
Peer-to-peer middleware systems are designed specifically to meet the need for
the automatic placement and subsequent location of the distributed objects managed by
peer-to-peer systems and applications.
Functional requirements • The function of peer-to-peer middleware is to simplify the
construction of services that are implemented across many hosts in a widely distributed
network. To achieve this it must enable clients to locate and communicate with any
individual resource made available to a service, even though the resources are widely
distributed amongst the hosts. Other important requirements include the ability to add
new resources and to remove them at will and to add hosts to the service and remove
them. Like other middleware, peer-to-peer middleware should offer a simple
programming interface to application programmers that is independent of the types of
distributed resource that the application manipulates.
Non-functional requirements • To perform effectively, peer-to-peer middleware must
also address the following non-functional requirements [cf. Kubiatowicz 2003]:
Global scalability: One of the aims of peer-to-peer applications is to exploit the
hardware resources of very large numbers of hosts connected to the Internet. Peer-to-
peer middleware must therefore be designed to support applications that access
millions of objects on tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of hosts.
Load balancing: The performance of any system designed to exploit a large number
of computers depends upon the balanced distribution of workload across them. For
the systems we are considering, this will be achieved by a random placement of
resources together with the use of replicas of heavily used resources.
Optimization for local interactions between neighbouring peers: The ‘network dis-
tance’ between nodes that interact has a substantial impact on the latency of individ-
ual interactions, such as client requests for access to resources. Network traffic
loadings are also impacted by it. The middleware should aim to place resources close
to the nodes that access them the most.
Accommodating to highly dynamic host availability: Most peer-to-peer systems are
constructed from host computers that are free to join or leave the system at any time.
The hosts and network segments used in peer-to-peer systems are not owned or
managed by any single authority; neither their reliability nor their continuous
participation in the provision of a service is guaranteed. A major challenge for peer-
to-peer systems is to provide a dependable service despite these facts. As hosts join
the system, they must be integrated into the system and the load must be redistributed
to exploit their resources. When they leave the system whether voluntarily or
involuntarily, the system must detect their departure and redistribute their load and
resources.
Studies of peer-to-peer applications and systems such as Gnutella and Overnet
have shown a considerable turnover of participating hosts [Saroiu et al. 2002,
Bhagwan et al. 2003]. For the Overnet peer-to-peer file-sharing system, with 85,000


===== page 450 =====
432 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.3 Distribution of information in a routing overlay
A’s routing knowledge D’s routing knowledge
C
A
D
B
Object:
B’s routing knowledge C’s routing knowledge
Node:
active hosts throughout the Internet, Bhagwan et al. measured an average session
length of 135 minutes (and a median of 79 minutes) for a random sample of 1,468
hosts over a 7-day period, with 260 to 650 of the 1,468 hosts available to the service
at any time. (A session represents a period during which a host is available before it
is voluntarily or unavoidably disconnected.)
On the other hand, Microsoft researchers measured a session length of 37.7
hours for a random sample of 20,000 machines connected to the Microsoft corporate
network, with between 14,700 and 15,600 of the machines available for service at
any given time [Castro et al. 2003]. These measurements are based on a feasibility
study for the Farsite peer-to-peer file system [Bolosky et al. 2000]. The huge variance
amongst the figures obtained in these studies is mainly attributable to the differences
in behaviour and network environment between individual Internet users and the
users in a corporate network such as Microsoft’s.
Security of data in an environment with heterogeneous trust: In global-scale sys-
tems with participating hosts of diverse ownership, trust must be built up by the use
of authentication and encryption mechanisms to ensure the integrity and privacy of
information.
Anonymity, deniability and resistance to censorship: We have noted (in the box on
page 429) that anonymity for the holders and recipients of data is a legitimate concern
in many situations demanding resistance to censorship. A related requirement is that
the hosts that hold data should be able to plausibly deny responsibility for holding or
supplying it. The use of large numbers of hosts in peer-to-peer systems can be helpful
in achieving these properties.
How best to design a middleware layer to support global-scale peer-to-peer systems is
therefore a difficult problem. The requirements for scalability and availability make it


===== page 451 =====
SECTION 10.4 ROUTING OVERLAYS 433
infeasible to maintain a database at all client nodes giving the locations of all the
resources (objects) of interest.
Knowledge of the locations of objects must be partitioned and distributed
throughout the network. Each node is made responsible for maintaining detailed
knowledge of the locations of nodes and objects in a portion of the namespace as well
as a general knowledge of the topology of the entire namespace (Figure 10.3). A high
degree of replication of this knowledge is necessary to ensure dependability in the face
of the volatile availability of hosts and intermittent network connectivity. In the systems
we describe below, replication factors as high as 16 are typically used.
10.4 Routing overlays
The development of middleware that meets the functional and non-functional
requirements outlined in the previous section is an active area of research, and several
significant middleware systems have already emerged. In this chapter we describe
several of them in detail.
In peer-to-peer systems a distributed algorithm known as a routing overlay takes
responsibility for locating nodes and objects. The name denotes the fact that the
middleware takes the form of a layer that is responsible for routing requests from any
client to a host that holds the object to which the request is addressed. The objects of
interest may be placed at and subsequently relocated to any node in the network without
client involvement. It is termed an overlay since it implements a routing mechanism in
the application layer that is quite separate from any other routing mechanisms deployed
at the network level such as IP routing. This approach to the management and location
of replicated objects was first analyzed and shown to be effective for networks involving
sufficiently many nodes in a groundbreaking paper by Plaxton et al. [1997].
The routing overlay ensures that any node can access any object by routing each
request through a sequence of nodes, exploiting knowledge at each of them to locate the
destination object. Peer-to-peer systems usually store multiple replicas of objects to
ensure availability. In that case, the routing overlay maintains knowledge of the location
of all the available replicas and delivers requests to the nearest ‘live’ node (i.e. one that
has not failed) that has a copy of the relevant object.
The GUIDs used to identify nodes and objects are an example of the ‘pure’ names
referred to in Section 13.1.1. These are also known as opaque identifiers, since they
reveal nothing about the locations of the objects to which they refer.
The main task of a routing overlay is the following:
Routing of requests to objects: A client wishing to invoke an operation on an object
submits a request including the object’s GUID to the routing overlay, which routes
the request to a node at which a replica of the object resides.
But the routing overlay must also perform some other tasks:
Insertion of objects: A node wishing to make a new object available to a peer-to-peer
service computes a GUID for the object and announces it to the routing overlay,
which then ensures that the object is reachable by all other clients.


===== page 452 =====
434 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.4 Basic programming interface for a distributed hash table (DHT) as implemented by the
PAST API over Pastry
put(GUID, data)
Stores data in replicas at all nodes responsible for the object identified by GUID.
remove(GUID)
Deletes all references to GUID and the associated data.
value = get(GUID)
Retrieves the data associated with GUID from one of the nodes responsible for it.
Deletion of objects: When clients request the removal of objects from the service the
routing overlay must make them unavailable.
Node addition and removal: Nodes (i.e., computers) may join and leave the service.
When a node joins the service, the routing overlay arranges for it to assume some of
the responsibilities of other nodes. When a node leaves (either voluntarily or as a
result of a system or network fault), its responsibilities are distributed amongst the
other nodes.
An object’s GUID is computed from all or part of the state of the object using a function
that delivers a value that is, with very high probability, unique. Uniqueness is verified
by searching for another object with the same GUID. A hash function (such as SHA-1,
see Section 11.4) is used to generate the GUID from the object’s value. Because these
randomly distributed identifiers are used to determine the placement of objects and to
retrieve them, overlay routing systems are sometimes described as distributed hash
tables (DHT). This is reflected by the simplest form of API used to access them, as
shown in Figure 10.4. With this API, the put() operation is used to submit a data item to
be stored together with its GUID. The DHT layer takes responsibility for choosing a
location for it, storing it (with replicas to ensure availability) and providing access to it
via the get() operation.
A slightly more flexible form of API is provided by a distributed object location
and routing (DOLR) layer, as shown in Figure 10.5. With this interface objects can be
stored anywhere and the DOLR layer is responsible for maintaining a mapping between
object identifiers (GUIDs) and the addresses of the nodes at which replicas of the objects
are located. Objects may be replicated and stored with the same GUID at different hosts,
and the routing overlay takes responsibility for routing requests to the nearest available
replica.
With the DHT model, a data item with GUID X is stored at the node whose GUID
is numerically closest to X and at the r hosts whose GUIDs are next-closest to it
numerically, where r is a replication factor chosen to ensure a very high probability of
availability. With the DOLR model, locations for the replicas of data objects are decided
outside the routing layer and the DOLR layer is notified of the host address of each
replica using the publish() operation.


===== page 453 =====
SECTION 10.4 ROUTING OVERLAYS 435
Figure 10.5 Basic programming interface for distributed object location and routing (DOLR) as
implemented by Tapestry
publish(GUID)
GUID can be computed from the object (or some part of it, e.g., its name). This
function makes the node performing a publish operation the host for the object
corresponding to GUID.
unpublish(GUID)
Makes the object corresponding to GUID inaccessible.
sendToObj(msg, GUID, [n])
Following the object-oriented paradigm, an invocation message is sent to an object
in order to access it. This might be a request to open a TCP connection for data
transfer or to return a message containing all or part of the object’s state. The final
optional parameter [n], if present, requests the delivery of the same message to n
replicas of the object.
The interfaces in Figures 10.4 and 10.5 are based on a set of abstract
representations proposed by Dabek et al. [2003] to show that most peer-to-peer routing
overlay implementations developed to date provide very similar functionality.
Research on the design of routing overlay systems began in 2000 and had reached
fruition by 2005, with the development and evaluation of several successful prototypes.
The evaluations demonstrated that their performance and dependability were adequate
for use in many production environments. In the next section we describe two of these
in detail: Pastry, which implements a distributed hash table API similar to the one
presented in Figure 10.4, and Tapestry, which implements an API similar to that shown
in Figure 10.5. Both Pastry and Tapestry employ a routing mechanism known as prefix
routing to determine routes for the delivery of messages based on the values of the
GUIDs to which they are addressed. Prefix routing narrows the search for the next node
along the route by applying a binary mask that selects an increasing number of
hexadecimal digits from the destination GUID after each hop. (This technique is also
employed in classless interdomain routing for IP packets, as outlined in Section 3.4.3.)
Other routing schemes have been developed that exploit different measures of
distance to narrow the search for the next hop destination. Chord [Stoica et al. 2001]
bases the choice on the numerical difference between the GUIDs of the selected node
and the destination node. CAN [Ratnasamy et al. 2001] uses distance in a d-dimensional
hyperspace into which nodes are placed. Kademlia [Maymounkov and Mazieres 2002]
uses the XOR of pairs of GUIDs as a metric for distance between nodes. Because XOR
is symmetric, Kademlia can maintain participants’ routing tables very simply; they
always receive requests from the same nodes contained in their routing tables.
GUIDs are not human-readable, so client applications must obtain the GUIDs for
resources of interest through some form of indexing service using human-readable
names or search requests. Ideally, these indexes are also stored in a peer-to-peer manner
to overcome the weaknesses of centralized indexes evidenced by Napster. But in simple
cases, such as music files or publications available for peer-to-peer download, they can
simply be indexed on web pages (cf. BitTorrent [Cohen 2003]). In BitTorrent a web


===== page 454 =====
436 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
index search leads to a stub file containing details of the desired resource, including its
GUID and the URL of a tracker – a host that holds an up-to-date list of network
addresses for providers willing to supply the file (see Chapter 20 for more details of the
BitTorrent protocol).
The foregoing description of routing overlays will probably have raised questions
in the reader’s mind about their performance and reliability. Answers to these questions
will emerge from the descriptions of practical routing overlay systems in the next
section.
10.5 Overlay case studies: Pastry, Tapestry
The prefix routing approach is adopted by both Pastry and Tapestry. Pastry is the
message routing infrastructure deployed in several applications including PAST
[Druschel and Rowstron 2001], an archival (immutable) file storage system
implemented as a distributed hash table with the API in Figure 10.4, and Squirrel, a peer-
to-peer web caching service described in Section 10.6.1. Pastry has a straightforward but
effective design that makes it a good first example for us to study in detail.
Tapestry is the basis for the OceanStore storage system, which we describe in
Section 10.6.2. It has a more complex architecture than Pastry because it aims to support
a wider range of locality approaches. We describe Tapestry in Section 10.5.2.
We also look at alternative unstructured approaches in Section 10.5.3, looking in
detail at the overlay style adopted by Gnutella.
10.5.1 Pastry
Pastry [Rowstron and Druschel 2001, Castro et al. 2002a, freepastry.org] is a routing
overlay with the characteristics that we outlined in Section 10.4. All the nodes and
objects that can be accessed through Pastry are assigned 128-bit GUIDs. For nodes,
these are computed by applying a secure hash function (such as SHA-1; see Section
11.4.3) to the public key with which each node is provided. For objects such as files, the
GUID is computed by applying a secure hash function to the object’s name or to some
part of the object’s stored state. The resulting GUIDs have the usual properties of secure
hash values – that is, they are randomly distributed in the range 0 to 2128–1. They
provide no clues as to the value from which they were computed, and clashes between
GUIDs for different nodes or objects are extremely unlikely. (If a clash occurs, Pastry
detects it and takes remedial action.)
In a network with N participating nodes, the Pastry routing algorithm will
correctly route a message addressed to any GUID in O(log N) steps. If the GUID
identifies a node that is currently active, the message is delivered to that node; otherwise,
the message is delivered to the active node whose GUID is numerically closest to it.
Active nodes take responsibility for processing requests addressed to all objects in their
numerical neighbourhood.
Routing steps involve the use of an underlying transport protocol (normally UDP)
to transfer the message to a Pastry node that is ‘closer’ to its destination. But note that
the closeness referred to here is in an entirely artificial space – the space of GUIDs. The


===== page 455 =====
SECTION 10.5 OVERLAY CASE STUDIES: PASTRY, TAPESTRY 437
Figure 10.6 Circular routing alone is correct but inefficient Based on Rowstron and Druschel [2001]
0 FFFFF....F (2128-1)
D471F1
D467C4
D46A1C
D13DA3
65A1FC
The dots depict live nodes. The space is considered as circular: node 0 is adjacent to node
(2128-1). The diagram illustrates the routing of a message from node 65A1FC to D46A1C
using leaf set information alone, assuming leaf sets of size 8 (l = 4). This is a degenerate type
of routing that would scale very poorly; it is not used in practice.
real transport of a message across the Internet between two Pastry nodes may require a
substantial number of IP hops. To minimize the risk of unnecessarily extended transport
paths, Pastry uses a locality metric based on network distance in the underlying network
(such as a hop counts or round-trip latency measurements) to select appropriate
neighbours when setting up the routing tables used at each node.
Thousands of hosts located at widely dispersed sites can participate in a Pastry
overlay. It is fully self-organizing: when new nodes join the overlay they obtain the data
needed to construct a routing table and other required state from existing members in
O(log N) messages, where N is the number of hosts participating in the overlay. In the
event of a node failure or departure, the remaining nodes can detect its absence and
cooperatively reconfigure to reflect the required changes in the routing structure in a
similar number of messages.
Routing algorithm • The full routing algorithm involves the use of a routing table at
each node to route messages efficiently, but for the purposes of explanation, we describe
the routing algorithm in two stages. The first stage describes a simplified form of the
algorithm that routes messages correctly but inefficiently without a routing table, and


===== page 456 =====
438 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.7 First four rows of a Pastry routing table
p = GUID prefixes and corresponding node handles n
0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
1 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 6A 6B 6C 6F 6E 6F
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
2 650 651 652 653 654 655 656 657 658 659 65A 65B 65C 65D 65E 65F
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
3 65A0 65A1 65A2 65A3 65A4 65A5 65A6 65A7 65A8 65A9 65AA 65AB 65AC 65AD 65AE 65AF
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
The routing table is located at a node whose GUID begins 65A1. Digits are in hexadecimal.
Thens represent [GUID, IP address] pairs that act as node handles specifying the next hop
to be taken by messages addressed to GUIDs that match each given prefix. Grey-shaded
entries in the table body indicate that the prefix matches the current GUID up to the given
value of p: the next row down or the leaf set should be examined to find a route. Although
there are a maximum of 128 rows in the table, only log16 N rows will be populated on average
in a network with N active nodes.
the second stage describes the full routing algorithm, which routes a request to any node
inO(logN)messages:
Stage I: Each active node stores a leaf set – a vector L (of size 2l) containing the
GUIDs and IP addresses of the nodes whose GUIDs are numerically closest on either
side of its own (l above and l below). Leaf sets are maintained by Pastry as nodes join
and leave. Even after a node failure, they will be corrected within a short time. (Fault
recovery is discussed below.) It is therefore an invariant of the Pastry system that the
leaf sets reflect a recent state of the system and that they converge on the current state
in the face of failures up to some maximum rate of failure.
The GUID space is treated as circular: GUID 0’s lower neighbour is 2128–1.
Figure 10.6 gives a view of active nodes distributed in this circular address space.
Since every leaf set includes the GUIDs and IP addresses of the current node’s
immediate neighbours, a Pastry system with correct leaf sets of size at least 2 can
route messages to any GUID trivially as follows: any node A that receives a message
M with destination address D routes the message by comparing D with its own GUID
A and with each of the GUIDs in its leaf set and forwarding M to the node amongst
them that is numerically closest to D.


===== page 457 =====
SECTION 10.5 OVERLAY CASE STUDIES: PASTRY, TAPESTRY 439
Figure 10.8 Pastry routing example Based on Rowstron and Druschel [2001]
0 FFFFF....F (2128-1)
D471F1
D467C4
D46A1C D462BA
D4213F
D13DA3
65A1FC
Routing a message from node 65A1FC to D46A1C. With the aid of a well-populated routing
table the message can be delivered in ~ log16(N) hops.
Figure 10.6 illustrates this for a Pastry system with l = 4. (In typical real
installations of Pastry, l = 8.) Based on the definition of leaf sets we can conclude that
at each step M is forwarded to a node that is closer to D than the current node and that
this process will eventually deliver M to the active node closest to D. But such a
routing scheme is clearly very inefficient, requiring ~N/2l hops to deliver a message
in a network with N nodes.
Stage II: The second part of our explanation describes the full Pastry algorithm and
shows how efficient routing is achieved with the aid of routing tables.
Each Pastry node maintains a tree-structured routing table giving GUIDs and
IP addresses for a set of nodes spread throughout the entire range of 2128 possible
GUID values, with increased density of coverage for GUIDs numerically close to its
own.
Figure 10.7 shows the structure of the routing table for a specific node, and
Figure 10.8 illustrates the actions of the routing algorithm. The routing table is
structured as follows: GUIDs are viewed as hexadecimal values and the table
classifies GUIDs based on their hexadecimal prefixes. The table has as many rows as
there are hexadecimal digits in a GUID, so for the prototype Pastry system that we
are describing, there are 128/4 = 32 rows. Any row n contains 15 entries – one for
each possible value of the nth hexadecimal digit, excluding the value in the local


===== page 458 =====
440 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.9 Pastry’s routing algorithm
To handle a message M addressed to a node D (where R[p,i] is the element at column i,
row p of the routing table):
1. If (L <D < L) { // the destination is within the leaf set or is the current node.
-l l
2. Forward M to the element L of the leaf set with GUID closest to D or the
i
current node A.
3. } else { // use the routing table to despatch M to a node with a closer GUID
4. Find p, the length of the longest common prefix of D and A,. and i, the (p+1)th
hexadecimal digit of D.
5. If (R[p,i](cid:143)null) forward M to R[p,i] // route M to a node with a longer common pre-
fix.
6. else { // there is no entry in the routing table.
7. Forward M to any node in L or R with a common prefix of length p but a
GUID that is numerically closer.
}
}
node’s GUID. Each entry in the table points to one of the potentially many nodes
whose GUIDs have the relevant prefix.
The routing process at any node A uses the information in its routing table R
and leaf set L to handle each request from an application and each incoming message
from another node according to the algorithm shown in Figure 10.9.
We can be sure that the algorithm will succeed in delivering M to its destination because
lines 1, 2 and 7 perform the actions described in Stage I of our description above, and
we have shown this to be a complete, although inefficient, routing algorithm. The
remaining steps are designed to use the routing table to improve the algorithm’s
performance by reducing the number of hops required.
Lines 4–5 come into play whenever D does not fall within the numeric range of
the current node’s leaf set and relevant routing table entries are available. The selection
of a destination for the next hop involves comparing the hexadecimal digits of D with
those of A (the GUID of the current node) from left to right to discover the length, p, of
their longest common prefix. This length is then used as a row offset, together with the
first non-matching digit of D as a column offset, to access the required element of the
routing table. The construction of the table ensures that this element (if not empty)
contains the IP address of a node whose GUID has p+1 prefix digits in common with D.
Line 7 is used when D falls outside the numeric range of the leaf set and there isn’t
a relevant routing table entry. This case is rare; it arises only when nodes have recently
failed and the table hasn’t yet been updated. The routing algorithm is able to proceed by
scanning both the leaf set and the routing table and forwarding M to another node whose
GUID has p matching prefix digits but is numerically closer to D. If that node is in L,
then we are following the Stage I procedure illustrated in Figure 10.6. If it is in R, then
it must be closer to D than any node in L, hence we are improving on Stage I.
Host integration • New nodes use a joining protocol in order to acquire their routing
table and leaf set contents and notify other nodes of changes they must make to their


===== page 459 =====
SECTION 10.5 OVERLAY CASE STUDIES: PASTRY, TAPESTRY 441
tables. First, the new node computes a suitable GUID (typically by applying the SHA-1
hash function to the node’s public key), then it makes contact with a nearby Pastry node.
(Here we use the term nearby to refer to network distance, i.e., a small number of
network hops or low transmission delay; see the boxbelow.)
Suppose that the new node’s GUID is X and the nearby node it contacts has GUID
A. Node X sends a special join request message to A, giving X as its destination. A
despatches the join message via Pastry in the normal way. Pastry will route the join
message to the existing node whose GUID is numerically closest to X; let us call this
destination node Z.
A, Z and all the nodes (B, C,...) through which the join message is routed on its
way to Z add additional steps to the normal Pastry routing algorithm, which result in the
transmission of the contents of the relevant parts of their routing tables and leaf sets to
X. X examines them and constructs its own routing table and leaf set from them,
requesting some additional information from other nodes if necessary.
To see how X builds its routing table, note that the first row of the table depends
on the value of X’s GUID, and to minimize routing distances, the table should be
constructed to route messages via neighbouring nodes whenever possible. A is a
neighbour of X, so the first row of A’s table is a good initial choice for the first row of
X’s table, X . On the other hand, A’s table is probably not relevant for the second row,
0
X , because X’s and A’s GUIDs may not share the same first hexadecimal digit. The
1
routing algorithm ensures that X’s and B’s GUIDs do share the same first digit, though,
which implies that the second row of B’s routing table, B , is a suitable initial value for
1
X . Similarly, C is suitable for X and so on.
1 2 2,
Furthermore, recalling the properties of leaf sets, note that since Z’s GUID is
numerically closest to X’s,X’s leaf set should be similar to Z’s. In fact, X’s ideal leaf set
will differ from Z’s by just one member. Z’s leaf set is therefore taken as an adequate
initial approximation, which will eventually be optimized through interaction with its
neighbours as described in the fault tolerance subsection below.
Finally, once X has constructed its leaf set and routing table in the manner outlined
above, it sends their contents to all the nodes identified in the leaf set and the routing
table and they adjust their own tables to incorporate the new node. The entire task of
incorporating a new node into the Pastry infrastructure requires the transmission of
O(logN)messages.
Host failure or departure • Nodes in the Pastry infrastructure may fail or depart without
warning. A Pastry node is considered failed when its immediate neighbours (in GUID
space) can no longer communicate with it. When this occurs, it is necessary to repair the
leaf sets that contain the failed node’s GUID.
Nearest neighbour algorithm
The new node should have the address of at least one existing Pastry node, but it
might not be nearby. To ensure that nearby nodes are known Pastry includes a
‘nearest neighbour’ algorithm to find a nearby node by recursively measuring the
round-trip delay for a probe message sent periodically to each member of the leaf set
of the nearest currently known Pastry node.


===== page 460 =====
442 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
To repair its leaf set L, the node that discovers the failure looks for a live node
close to the failed node in L and requests a copy of that node’s leaf set, L’.L’ will contain
a sequence of GUIDs that partly overlap those in L, including one with an appropriate
value to replace the failed node. Other neighbouring nodes are then informed of the
failure and they perform a similar procedure. This repair procedure guarantees that leaf
sets will be repaired unless l adjacently numbered nodes fail simultaneously.
Repairs to routing tables are made on a ‘when discovered’ basis. The routing of
messages can proceed with some routing table entries that are no longer live – failed
routing attempts result in the use of a different entry from the same row of a routing
table.
Locality • The Pastry routing structure is highly redundant: there are many routes
between each pair of nodes. The construction of the routing tables aims to take
advantage of this redundancy to reduce actual message transmission times by exploiting
the locality properties of nodes in the underlying transport network (which is normally
a subset of nodes in the Internet).
Recall that each row in a routing table contains 16 entries. The entries in the ith
row give the addresses of 16 nodes with GUIDs with i–1 initial hexadecimal digits that
match the current node’s GUID and an ith digit that takes each of the possible
hexadecimal values. A well-populated Pastry overlay will contain many more nodes
than can be contained in an individual routing table; whenever a new routing table is
being constructed a choice is made for each position between several candidates (taken
from routing information supplied by other nodes) based on a proximity neighbour
selection algorithm [Gummadi et al. 2003]. A locality metric (number of IP hops or
measured latency) is used to compare candidates and the closest available node is
chosen. Since the information available is not comprehensive, this mechanism cannot
produce globally optimal routings, but simulations have shown that it results in routes
that are on average only about 30–50% longer than the optimum.
Fault tolerance • As described above, the Pastry routing algorithm assumes that all
entries in routing tables and leaf sets refer to live, correctly functioning nodes. All nodes
send ‘heartbeat’ messages (i.e., messages sent at fixed time intervals to indicate that the
sender is alive) to neighbouring nodes in their leaf sets, but information about failed
nodes detected in this manner may not be disseminated sufficiently rapidly to eliminate
routing errors. Nor does it account for malicious nodes that may attempt to interfere with
correct routing. To overcome these problems, clients that depend upon reliable message
delivery are expected to employ an at-least-once delivery mechanism (see Section
5.3.1) and repeat their requests several times in the absence of a response. This will
allow Pastry a longer time window to detect and repair node failures.
To deal with any remaining failures or malicious nodes, a small degree of
randomness is introduced into the route selection algorithm described in Figure 10.9.
Essentially, the step in line 5 of Figure 10.9 is modified in a randomly selected small
proportion of cases to yield a common prefix that is less than the maximum length. This
results in the use of a routing taken from an earlier row of the routing table, producing
less optimal but different routing than the standard version of the algorithm. With this
random variation in the routing algorithm, client retransmissions should eventually
succeed even in the presence of a small number of malicious nodes.


===== page 461 =====
SECTION 10.5 OVERLAY CASE STUDIES: PASTRY, TAPESTRY 443
Dependability • The authors of Pastry have developed an updated version called
MSPastry [Castro et al. 2003] that uses the same routing algorithm and similar host
management methods, but also includes some additional dependability measures and
some performance optimizations in the host management algorithms.
Dependability measures include the use of acknowledgements at each hop in the
routing algorithm. If the sending host does not receive an acknowledgement after a
specified timeout, it selects an alternative route and retransmits the message. The node
that failed to send an acknowledgement is then noted as a suspected failure.
As mentioned above, to detect failed nodes each Pastry node periodically sends a
heartbeat message to its immediate neighbour to the left (i.e., with a lower GUID) in the
leaf set. Each node also records the time of the last heartbeat message received from its
immediate neighbour on the right (with a higher GUID). If the interval since the last
heartbeat exceeds a timeout threshold, the detecting node starts a repair procedure that
involves contacting the remaining nodes in the leaf set with a notification about the
failed node and a request for suggested replacements. Even in the case of multiple
simultaneous failures, this procedure terminates with all nodes on the left side of the
failed node having leaf sets that contain the l live nodes with the closest GUIDs.
We have seen that the routing algorithm can function correctly using leaf sets
alone; but the maintenance of the routing tables is important for performance. Suspected
failed nodes in routing tables are probed in a similar manner to that used for the leaf set
and if they fail to respond, their routing table entries are replaced with a suitable
alternative obtained from a nearby node. In addition, a simple gossip protocol (see
Section 18.4.1) is used to periodically exchange routing table information between
nodes in order to repair failed entries and prevent slow deterioration of the locality
properties. The gossip protocol is run about every 20 minutes.
Evaluation work • Castro and his colleagues have carried out an exhaustive
performance evaluation of MSPastry, aimed at determining the impact on performance
and dependability of the host join/leave rate and the associated dependability
mechanisms [Castro et al. 2003].
The evaluation was performed by running the MSPastry system under control of
a simulator running on a single machine that simulates a large network of hosts, with
message passing replaced by simulated transmission delays. The simulation realistically
modelled the join/leave behaviour of hosts and IP transmission delays based on
parameters from real installations.
All of the dependability mechanisms of MSPastry were included, with realistic
intervals for probe and heartbeat messages. The simulation work was validated by
comparison with measurements taken with MSPastry running a real application load
across an internal network with 52 nodes.
Here we summarize the key results.
Dependability: With an assumed IP message loss rate of 0%, MSPastry failed to
deliver 1.5 in 100,000 requests (presumably due to the non-availability of destination
hosts), and all requests that were delivered arrived at the correct node.
With an assumed IP message loss rate of 5%, MSPastry lost about 3.3 in
100,000 requests and 1.6 in 100,000 requests were delivered to the wrong node. The
use of per-hop acknowledgements in MSPastry ensures that all lost or misdirected
messages are eventually retransmitted and reach the correct node.


===== page 462 =====
444 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Performance: The metric used to evaluate the performance of MSPastry is called
relative delay penalty (RDP) [Chu et al. 2000], or stretch. RDP is a direct measure
of the extra cost incurred in employing an overlay routing layer. It is the ratio between
the average delay in delivering a request by the routing overlay and in delivering a
similar message between the same two nodes via UDP/IP. The RDP values observed
for MSPastry under simulated loads ranged from ~1.8 with zero network message
loss to ~2.2 with 5% network message loss.
Overheads: The extra network load generated by control traffic – messages involved
in maintaining leaf sets and routing tables – was less than 2 messages per minute per
node. The RDP and control traffic were both increased significantly for session
lengths less than about 60 minutes due to initial setup overheads.
Overall these results show that overlay routing layers can be constructed that achieve
good performance and high dependability with thousands of nodes operating in realistic
environments. Even with mean session lengths shorter than 60 minutes and high
network error rates the system degrades gracefully, continuing to provide an effective
service.
Optimizing overlay lookup latency • Zhang et al. [2005a] have shown that the lookup
performance of an important class of overlay networks (including Pastry, Chord and
Tapestry) can be substantially enhanced by the inclusion of a simple learning algorithm
that measures the latencies actually experienced in accessing the overlay nodes and thus
incrementally modifies the overlay routing tables to optimize access latencies.
10.5.2 Tapestry
Tapestry implements a distributed hash table and routes messages to nodes based on
GUIDs associated with resources using prefix routing in a manner similar to Pastry. But
Tapestry’s API conceals the distributed hash table from applications behind a DOLR
interface like the one shown in Figure 10.5. Nodes that hold resources use the
publish(GUID) primitive to make them known to Tapestry, and the holders of resources
remain responsible for storing them. Replicated resources are published with the same
GUID by each node that holds a replica, resulting in multiple entries in the Tapestry
routing structure.
This gives Tapestry applications additional flexibility: they can place replicas
close (in network distance) to frequent users of resources in order to reduce latency and
minimize network load or to ensure tolerance of network and host failures. But this
distinction between Pastry and Tapestry is not fundamental: Pastry applications can
achieve similar flexibility by making the objects associated with GUIDs simply act as
proxies for more complex application-level objects and Tapestry can be used to
implement a distributed hash table in terms of its DOLR API [Dabek et al. 2003].
In Tapestry 160-bit identifiers are used to refer both to objects and to the nodes
that perform routing actions. Identifiers are either NodeIds, which refer to computers
that perform routing operations, or GUIDs, which refer to the objects. For any resource
with GUID G there is a unique root node with GUID R that is numerically closest to
G
G. Hosts H holding replicas of G periodically invoke publish(G) to ensure that newly
arrived hosts become aware of the existence of G. On each invocation of publish(G) a


===== page 463 =====
SECTION 10.5 OVERLAY CASE STUDIES: PASTRY, TAPESTRY 445
Figure 10.10 Tapestry routing From Zhao et al. [2004]
4377 (Root for 4378)
Tapestry routings
for 4377
437A
43FE
publish path
4228
4361
Location mapping 4378
4664
for 4378 Phil’s
Books
4B4F 4A6D
Routes actually
taken by send(4378) E791 4378
57EC AA93 Phil’s
Books
Replicas of the file Phil’s Books (G=4378) are hosted at nodes 4228 and AA93. Node 4377 is
the root node for object 4378. The Tapestry routings shown are some of the entries in routing
tables. The publish paths show routes followed by the publish messages laying down cached
location mappings for object 4378. The location mappings are subsequently used to route
messages sent to 4378.
publish message is routed from the invoker towards node R . On receipt of a publish
G
messageR enters (G, IP ), the mapping between G and the sending host’s IP address
G H
in its routing table, and each node along the publication path cachesthe same mapping.
This process is illustrated in Figure 10.10. When nodes hold multiple (G, IP) mappings
for the same GUID, they are sorted by the network distance (round-trip time) to the IP
address. For replicated objects this results in the selection of the nearest available replica
of the object as the destination for subsequent messages sent to the object.
Zhao et al. [2004] give full details of the Tapestry routing algorithms and the
management of Tapestry’s routing tables in the face of node arrival and departure. Their
paper includes comprehensive performance evaluation data based on simulation of
large-scale Tapestry networks, showing that its performance is similar to Pastry’s. In
Section 10.6.2 we describe the OceanStore file store, which has been built and deployed
over Tapestry.
10.5.3 From structured to unstructured peer-to-peer
The discussion so far has focused exclusively on what are known as structured peer-to-
peer approaches. In structured approaches, there is an overall global policy governing
the topology of the network, the placement of objects in the network and the routing or
search functions used to locate objects in the network. In other words, there is a specific
(distributed) data structure underpinning the associated overlay and a set of algorithms


===== page 464 =====
446 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.11 Structured versus unstructured peer-to-peer systems
Structured peer-to-peer Unstructured peer-to-peer
Advantages Guaranteed to locate objects (assuming
they exist) and can offer time and Self-organizing and naturally resilient to
complexity bounds on this operation; node failure.
relatively low message overhead.
Disadvantages Need to maintain often complex
Probabilistic and hence cannot offer
overlay structures, which can be
absolute guarantees on locating objects;
difficult and costly to achieve,
prone to excessive messaging overhead
especially in highly dynamic
which can affect scalability.
environments.
operating over that data structure. This can clearly be seen in the examples of Pastry and
Tapestry based on the underlying distributed hash table and associated ring structures.
Because of the structure imposed, such algorithms are efficient and offer time bounds
on the location of objects, but at the cost of maintaining the underlying structures, often
in highly dynamic environments.
Because of this maintenance argument, unstructured peer-to-peer approaches
have also been developed. In unstructured approaches, there is no overall control over
the topology or the placement of objects within the network. Rather, the overlay is
created in an ad hoc manner, with each node that joins the network following some
simple, local rules to establish connectivity. In particular, a joining node will establish
contact with a set of neighbours knowing that the neighbours will also be connected to
further neighbours and so on, forming a network that is fundamentally decentralized and
self-organizing and hence resilient to node failure. To locate a given object, it is then
necessary to carry out a search of the resultant network topology; clearly, this approach
cannot offer any guarantees of being able to find the object and performance will be
unpredictable. In addition, there is a real risk of generating excessive message traffic to
locate objects.
A summary of the relative strengths of structured and unstructured peer-to-peer
systems is provided in Figure 10.11. It is interesting to reflect that, despite the apparent
drawbacks of unstructured peer-to-peer systems, this approach is dominant in the
Internet, particularly in supporting peer-to-peer file sharing (with systems such as
Gnutella, FreeNet and BitTorrent all adopting unstructured approaches). As will be
seen, significant advancements have been made in such systems to improve the
performance of unstructured approaches and this work is significant given the amount
of traffic generated by peer-to-peer file sharing in the Internet (for example, a study
carried out in the years 2008/9 indicates that peer-to-peer file-sharing applications
account for between 43% and 70% of all Internet traffic, depending on the part of the
world being considered [www.ipoque.com]).
Strategies for effective search • In peer-to-peer file sharing, all nodes in the network
offer files to the greater environment. As mentioned above, the problem of locating a file
then maps onto a search of the whole network to locate appropriate files. If implemented
naively, this would be implemented by flooding the network with requests. This is
precisely the strategy adopted in early versions of Gnutella. In particular, in Gnutella


===== page 465 =====
SECTION 10.5 OVERLAY CASE STUDIES: PASTRY, TAPESTRY 447
0.4, every node forwarded a request to each of its neighbours, who then in turn passed
this on to their neighbours, and so on until a match was found. Each search was also
constrained with a time-to-live field limiting the number of hops. At the time Gnutella
0.4 was deployed, the average connectivity was around 5 neighbours per node. This
approach is simple but does not scale and quickly floods the network with search-related
traffic.
A number of refinements have been developed for search in unstructured
networks [Lv et al. 2002, Tsoumakos and Roussopoulos 2006], including:
Expanded ring search: In this approach, the initiating node carries out a series of
searches with increasing values in the time-to-live field, recognizing that a significant
number of the requests will be met locally (especially if coupled with an effective
replication strategy, as discussed below).
Random walks: With random walks, the initiating node sets off a number of walkers
who follow their own random pathways through the interconnected graph offered by
the unstructured overlay.
Gossiping: In gossiping approaches, a node sends a request to a given neighbour with
a certain probability, and hence requests propagate through the network in a manner
similar to a virus through a population (as such, gossip protocols are also referred to
as epidemic protocols). The probability can either be fixed for a given network or
calculated dynamically based on previous experience and/or the current context.
(Note that gossiping is a common technique in distributed systems; further
applications can be found in Chapters 6 and 18).
Such strategies can significantly reduce the overhead of search in unstructured networks
and hence increase the scalability of the algorithms. Such strategies are also often
supported by appropriate replication techniques. By replicating content across a number
of peers, the probability of efficient discovery of particular files is significantly
enhanced. Techniques include whole file replication and the scattering of fragments of
files across the Internet – an approach that is used effectively in BitTorrent, for example,
to reduce the burden on any one peer in downloading large files (see Chapter 20).
Case study: Gnutella • Gnutella was originally launched in 2000 and since then has
grown to be one of the dominant and most influential peer-to-peer file-sharing
applications. As mentioned above, initially the protocol adopted a rather simple flooding
strategy that did not scale particularly well. In response to this, Gnutella 0.6 introduced
a range of modifications that have significantly improved the performance of the
protocol.
The first major amendment was to move from a pure peer-to-peer architecture
where all nodes are equal to one where all peers still cooperate to offer the service but
some nodes, designated to have additional resources, are elected as ultrapeers, and form
the heart of the network, with other peers taking on the role of leaf nodes (or leaves).
Leaves connect themselves to a small number of ultrapeers which are heavily connected
to other ultrapeers (with over 32 connections each). This dramatically reduces the
maximum number of hops required for exhaustive search. This style of peer-to-peer
architecture is referred to as a hybrid architecture and is also the approach adopted in
Skype (as discussed in Section 4.5.2).


===== page 466 =====
448 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.12 Key elements in the Gnutella protocol
File QRT QRT
Ultrapeer
Leaf node
The other key enhancement was the introduction of a Query Routing Protocol
(QRP) designed to reduce the number of queries issued by nodes. The protocol is based
on exchanging information about files contained on nodes and hence only forwarding
queries down paths where the system thinks there will be a positive outcome. Rather
than sharing information about files directly, the protocol produces a set of numbers
from hashing on the individual words in a file name. For example, a file name such as
“Chapter ten on P2P” will be represented by four numbers, say <65, 47, 09, 76>. A node
produces a Query Routing Table (QRT) containing the hash values representing each of
the files contained on that node which it then sends to all its associated ultrapeers.
Ultrapeers then produce their own Query Routing Tables based on a union of all the
entries from all the connected leaves together with entries for files contained in that
node, and exchange these with other connected ultrapeers. In this way, ultrapeers can
determine which paths offer a valid route for a given query, thus significantly reducing
the amount of unnecessary traffic. More specifically, an ultrapeer will forward a query
to a node if a match is found (indicating that node has the file) and will carry out the
same check before passing it on to another ultrapeer if it is the last hop to the file. Note
that, in order to avoid overloading of ultrapeers, nodes will send a query to one ultrapeer
at a time and then wait for a specified period to see if they get a positive response.
Finally, a query in Gnutella contains the network address of the initiating
ultrapeer, which implies that once a file is found it can be sent directly to the associated
ultrapeer (using UDP), avoiding a reverse traversal through the graph.
The major elements associated with Gnutella 0.6 are summarized in Figure 10.12.


===== page 467 =====
SECTION 10.6 APPLICATION CASE STUDIES: SQUIRREL, OCEANSTORE, IVY 449
10.6 Application case studies: Squirrel, OceanStore, Ivy
The routing overlay layers described in the preceding section have been exploited in
several application experiments and the resulting applications have been extensively
evaluated. We have chosen three of them for further study, the Squirrel web caching
service based on Pastry, and the OceanStore and Ivy file stores.
10.6.1 Squirrel web cache
The authors of Pastry have developed the Squirrel peer-to-peer web caching service for
use in local networks of personal computers [Iyer et al. 2002]. In medium and large local
networks web caching is typically performed using a dedicated server computer or
cluster. The Squirrel system performs the same task by exploiting storage and
computing resources already available on desktop computers in the local network. We
first give a brief general description of the operation of a web caching service, then we
outline the design of Squirrel and review its effectiveness.
Web caching • Web browsers generate HTTP GET requests for Internet objects like
HTML pages, images, etc. These may be serviced from a browser cache on the client
machine, from a proxy web cache (a service running on another computer in the same
local network or on a nearby node in the Internet) or from the origin web server (the
server whose domain name is included in the parameters of the GET request), depending
on which contains a fresh copy of the object. The local and proxy caches each contain a
set of recently retrieved objects organized for fast lookup by URL. Some objects are
uncacheable because they are generated dynamically by the server in response to each
request.
When a browser cache or proxy web cache receives a GET request, there are three
possibilities: the requested object is uncacheable, there is a cache miss or the object is
found in the cache. In the first two cases the request is forwarded to the next level
towards the origin web server. When the requested object is found in a cache, the cached
copy must be tested for freshness.
Web objects are stored in web servers and cache servers with some additional
metadata values including a timestamp giving a date of last modification (T) and
possibly a time-to-live (t) or an eTag (a hash computed from the contents of a web page).
These metadata items are supplied by the origin server whenever an object is returned
to a client.
Objects that have an associated time-to-live t, are considered fresh if T+t is later
than the current real time. For objects without a time-to-live, an estimated value for t is
used (often only a few seconds). If the result of this freshness evaluation is positive, the
cached object is returned to the client without contacting the origin web server.
Otherwise, a conditional GET (cGET) request is issued to the next level for validation.
There are two basic types of cGET requests: an If-Modified-Since request containing the
timestamp of the last known modification, and an If-None-Match request containing an
eTag representing the object contents. This cGET request can be serviced either by
another web cache or by the origin server. A web cache that receives a cGET request and
does not have a fresh copy of the object forwards the request towards the origin web


===== page 468 =====
450 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
server. The response contains either the entire object, or a not-modified message if the
cached object is unchanged.
Whenever a newly modified cacheable object is received from the origin server,
it is added to the set of objects in the local cache (displacing older objects that are still
valid if necessary) together with a timestamp, a time-to-live and an eTag if available.
The scheme described above is the basis of operation for the centralized proxy
web caching services deployed in most local networks that support large numbers of
web clients. Proxy web caches are typically implemented as a multi-threaded process
running on a single dedicated host or a set of processes running on a cluster of computers
and require a substantial quantity of dedicated computing resources in both cases.
Squirrel • The Squirrel web caching service performs the same functions using a small
part of the resources of each client computer on a local network. The SHA-1 secure hash
function is applied to the URL of each cached object to produce a 128-bit Pastry GUID.
Since the GUID is not used to validate the contents, it need not be based on the entire
object contents, as it is in other Pastry applications. The authors of Squirrel base their
justification for this on the end-to-end argument (Section 2.3.3), arguing that the
authenticity of a web page may be compromised at many points in its journey from the
host to the client; authentication of cached pages adds little to any overall guarantee of
authenticity and the HTTPS protocol (incorporating end-to-end Transport Layer
Security, discussed in Section 11.6.3) should be used to achieve a much better guarantee
for those interactions that require it.
In the simplest implementation of Squirrel – which proved to be the most effective
one – the node whose GUID is numerically closest to the GUID of an object becomes
that object’s home node, responsible for holding the cached copy of the object when
there is one.
Client nodes are configured to include a local Squirrel proxy process, which takes
responsibility for both local and remote caching of web objects. If a fresh copy of a
required object is not in the local cache, Squirrel routes a Get request or a cGet request
(when there is a stale copy of the object in the local cache) via Pastry to the home node.
If the home node has a fresh copy, it directly responds to the client with a not-modified
message or a fresh copy, as appropriate. If the home node has a stale copy or no copy of
the object, it issues a cGet or a Get to the origin server, respectively. The origin server
may respond with a not-modified message or a copy of the object. In the former case, the
home node revalidates its cache entry and forwards a copy of the object to the client. In
the latter case, it forwards a copy of the new value to the client and places a copy in its
local cache if the object is cacheable.
Evaluation of Squirrel • Squirrel was evaluated by simulation using modelled loads
derived from traces of the activity of existing centralized proxy web caches in two real
working environments within Microsoft, one with 105 active clients (in Cambridge) and
the other with more than 36,000 (in Redmond). The evaluation compared the
performance of a Squirrel web cache with a centralized one in three respects:
The reduction in total external bandwidth used: The total external bandwidth is
inversely related to the hit ratio, since it is only cache misses that generate requests
to external web servers. The hit ratios observed for centralized web cache servers
were 29% (for Redmond) and 38% (for Cambridge). When the same activity logs


===== page 469 =====
SECTION 10.6 APPLICATION CASE STUDIES: SQUIRREL, OCEANSTORE, IVY 451
were used to generate a simulated load for the Squirrel cache, with each client
contributing 100 Mbytes of disk storage, very similar hit ratios of 28% (Redmond)
and 37% (Cambridge) were achieved. It follows that the external bandwidth would
be reduced by a similar proportion.
The latency perceived by users for access to web objects: The use of a routing
overlay results in several message transfers (routing hops) across the local network
to transmit a request from a client to the host responsible for caching the relevant
object (the home node). The mean numbers of routing hops observed in the
simulation were 4.11 hops to deliver a GET request in the Redmond case and 1.8 hops
in the Cambridge case, whereas only a single message transfer is required to access
a centralized cache service.
However local transfers take only a few milliseconds with modern Ethernet
hardware, including TCP connection setup time, whereas wide area TCP message
transfers across the Internet require 10–100 ms. The Squirrel authors therefore argue
that the latency for access to objects found in the cache is swamped by the much
greater latency of access to objects not found in the cache, giving a similar user
experience to that provided with a centralized cache.
The computational and storage load imposed on client nodes: The average number
of cache requests served for other nodes by each node over the whole period of the
evaluation was extremely low, at only 0.31 per minute (Redmond), indicating that the
overall proportion of system resources consumed is extremely low.
Based on the measurements described above, the authors of Squirrel concluded that its
performance is comparable to that of a centralized cache. Squirrel achieves a reduction
in the observed latency for web page access close to that achievable by a centralized
cache server with a similarly sized dedicated cache. The additional load imposed on
client nodes is low and likely to be imperceptible to users. The Squirrel system was
subsequently deployed as the primary web cache in a local network with 52 client
machines using Squirrel, and the results confirmed their conclusions.
10.6.2 OceanStore file store
The developers of Tapestry have designed and built a prototype for a peer-to-peer file
store. Unlike PAST, it supports the storage of mutable files. The OceanStore design
[Kubiatowicz et al. 2000; Kubiatowicz 2003; Rhea et al. 2001, 2003] aims to provide a
very large scale, incrementally scalable persistent storage facility for mutable data
objects with long-term persistence and reliability in an environment of constantly
changing network and computing resources. OceanStore is intended for use in a variety
of applications including the implementation of an NFS-like file service, electronic mail
hosting, databases and other applications involving the sharing and persistent storage of
large numbers of data objects.
The design includes provision for the replicated storage of both mutable and
immutable data objects. The mechanism for maintaining consistency between replicas
can be tailored to application needs in a manner that was inspired by the Bayou system
(Section 18.4.2). Privacy and integrity are achieved through the encryption of data and
the use of a Byzantine agreement protocol (see Section 15.5) for updates to replicated


===== page 470 =====
452 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.13 Storage organization of OceanStore objects
version i+1
d2
root block
version i indirection blocks
d1 d2 d3 d4 d5
objects. This is needed because the trustworthiness of individual hosts cannot be
assumed.
An OceanStore prototype, called Pond [Rhea et al. 2003], has been built. It is
sufficiently complete to support applications and its performance has been evaluated
against a variety of benchmarks in order to validate the OceanStore design and compare
its performance with more traditional approaches. In the remainder of this section we
give an overview of the OceanStore/Pond design and summarize the evaluation results.
Pond uses the Tapestry routing overlay mechanism to place blocks of data at
nodes distributed throughout the Internet and to despatch requests to them.
Storage organization • OceanStore/Pond data objects are analogous to files, with their
data stored in a set of blocks. But each object is represented as an ordered sequence of
immutable versions that are (in principle) kept forever. Any update to an object results
in the generation of a new version. The versions share any unchanged blocks, following
the copy-on-write technique for creating and updating objects described in Section
7.4.2. So a small difference between versions requires only a small amount of additional
storage.
Objects are structured in a manner that is reminiscent of the Unix filing system,
with the data blocks organized and accessed through a metadata block called the root
block and additional indirection blocks if necessary (cf.Unix i-nodes). Another level of
indirection is used to associate a persistent textual or other externally visible name (for
example, the pathname for a file) with the sequence of versions of a data object. Figure
)etirw
no
ypoc(
DIUGB
certificate VGUID of current
version
d1 d3
fo
DIUGV
i
noisrev
AGUID
data blocks
VGUID of version i–1
Version i+1 has been updated in blocks d1,d2 and d3. The certificate and the root blocks include
some metadata not shown. All unlabelled arrows are BGUIDs.


===== page 471 =====
SECTION 10.6 APPLICATION CASE STUDIES: SQUIRREL, OCEANSTORE, IVY 453
Figure 10.14 Types of identifier used in OceanStore
Name Meaning Description
BGUID block GUID Secure hash of a data block
VGUID version GUID BGUID of the root block of a version
AGUID active GUID Uniquely identifies all the versions of an object
10.13 illustrates this organization. GUIDs are associated with the object (an AGUID),
the root block for each version of the object (a VGUID), the indirection blocks and the
data blocks (BGUIDs). Several replicas of each block are stored at peer nodes selected
according to locality and storage availability criteria, and their GUIDs are published
(using the publish() primitive of Figure 10.5) by each of the nodes that holds a replica
so that Tapestry can be used by clients to access the blocks.
Three types of GUIDs are used, as summarized in Figure 10.14. The first two are
GUIDs of the type normally assigned to objects stored in Tapestry – they are computed
from the contents of the relevant block using a secure hash function so that they can be
used later to authenticate and verify the integrity of the contents. The blocks that they
reference are necessarily immutable, since any change to the contents of a block would
invalidate the use of the GUID as an authentication token.
The third type of identifier used is AGUIDs. These refer (indirectly) to the entire
stream of versions of an object, enabling clients to access the current version of the
object or any previous version. Since the objects stored are mutable, the GUIDs used to
identify them cannot be derived from their contents, because that would render GUIDs
held in indexes, etc., obsolete whenever an object changed.
Instead, whenever a new storage object is created a permanent AGUID is
generated by applying a secure hash function to an application-specific name (e.g., a file
name) supplied by the client creating the object and a public key that represents the
object’s owner (see Section 11.2.5). In a filing system application, an AGUID would be
stored in the directories against each file name.
The association between an AGUID and the sequence of versions of the object
that it identifies is recorded in a signed certificate that is stored and replicated by a
primary copy replication scheme (also called passive replication; see Section 18.3.1).
The certificate includes the VGUID of the current version and the root block for every
version contains the VGUID of the previous version, so there is a chain of references
enabling clients that hold a certificate to traverse the entire chain of versions (Figure
10.13). A signed certificate is needed to ensure that the association is authentic and has
been made by an authorized principal. Clients are expected to check this. Whenever a
new version of an object is created, a new certificate is generated holding the VGUID
of the new version together with a timestamp and a version sequence number.
The trust model for peer-to-peer systems requires that construction of each new
certificate is agreed (as described below) amongst a small set of hosts called the inner
ring. Whenever a new object is stored in OceanStore, a set of hosts is selected to act as
the inner ring for that object. They use Tapestry’s publish() primitive to make the
AGUID for the object known to Tapestry. Clients can then use Tapestry to route requests
for the object’s certificate to one of the nodes in the inner ring.


===== page 472 =====
454 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
The new certificate replaces the old primary copy held at each inner ring node and
is disseminated to a larger number of secondary copies. It is left to clients to determine
how often they check for a new version (a similar decision has to be taken for cached
copies of files in NFS; most installations operate with a consistency window of 30
seconds between client and server; see Section 12.3).
As usual in peer-to-peer systems, trust cannot be placed in any individual host.
The updating of primary copies requires consensus agreement between the hosts in the
inner ring. They use a version of a state-machine-based Byzantine agreement algorithm
described by Castro and Liskov [2000] to update the object and sign the certificate. The
use of a Byzantine agreement protocol ensures that the certificate is correctly maintained
even if some members of the inner ring fail or behave maliciously. Because the
computational and communication costs of Byzantine agreement rise with the square of
the number of hosts involved, the number of hosts in the inner ring is kept small and the
resulting certificate is replicated more widely using the primary copy scheme mentioned
above.
Performing an update also involves checking access rights and serializing the
update with any other pending writes. Once the update process is completed for the
primary copy, the results are disseminated to secondary replicas stored on hosts outside
the inner ring using a multicast routing tree that is managed by Tapestry.
Because of their read-only nature, data blocks are replicated by a different, more
storage-efficient mechanism. This mechanism is based on the division of each block into
m equal-sized fragments, which are encoded using erasure codes [Weatherspoon and
Kubiatowicz 2002] to n fragments, where n>m. The key property of erasure coding is
that it is possible to reconstruct a block from any m of its fragments. In a system that uses
erasure coding all data objects remain available with the loss of up to n–m hosts. In the
Pond implementation m = 16 and n = 32, so for a doubling of the storage cost, the system
can tolerate the failure of up to 16 hosts without loss of data. Tapestry is used to store
fragments in and retrieve them from the network.
This high level of fault tolerance and data availability is achieved at some cost in
terms of reconstructing blocks from erasure-coded fragments. To minimize the impact
of this, the whole blocks are also stored in the network using Tapestry. Since they can
be reconstructed from their fragments, these blocks are treated as a cache – they are not
fault tolerant and they can be disposed of when storage space is required.
Performance • Pond was developed as a prototype to prove the feasibility of a scalable
peer-to-peer file service, rather than as a production implementation. It is implemented
in Java and includes almost all of the design outlined above. It was evaluated against
several purpose-designed benchmarks and in a simple emulation of an NFS client and
server in terms of OceanStore objects. The developers tested the NFS emulation against
the Andrew benchmark [Howard et al. 1988], which emulates a software development
workload. The table in Figure 10.15 shows the results for the latter. They were obtained
using 1 GHz Pentium III PC running Linux. The LAN tests were performed using a
Gigabit Ethernet and the WAN results were obtained using two sets of nodes linked by
the Internet.
The conclusions drawn by the authors were that the performance of
OceanStore/Pond when operating over a wide area network (i.e., the Internet)
substantially exceeds that of NFS for reading and is within a factor of three of NFS for


===== page 473 =====
SECTION 10.6 APPLICATION CASE STUDIES: SQUIRREL, OCEANSTORE, IVY 455
Figure 10.15 Performance evaluation of the Pond prototype emulating NFS
LAN WAN Predominant
operations in
Phase Linux Pond Linux Pond
benchmark
NFS NFS
1 0.0 1.9 0.9 2.8 Read and write
2 0.3 11.0 9.4 16.8 Read and write
3 1.1 1.8 8.3 1.8 Read
4 0.5 1.5 6.9 1.5 Read
5 2.6 21.0 21.5 32.0 Read and write
Total 4.5 37.2 47.0 54.9
The figures show times in seconds to run different phases of the Andrew benchmark. It has
five phases: (1) creates subdirectories recursively, (2) copies a source tree, (3) examines the
status of all the files in the tree without examining their data, (4) examines every byte of data
in all the files and (5) compiles and links the files.
updating files and directories; the LAN results were substantially worse. Overall, the
results suggest that an Internet-scale peer-to-peer file service based on the OceanStore
design would be an effective solution for the distribution of files that do not change very
rapidly (such as cached copies of web pages). Its potential for use as an alternative to
NFS is questionable even for wide-area networks and is clearly uncompetitive for purely
local use.
These results were obtained with data blocks stored without erasure-code-based
fragmentation and replication. The use of public keys contributes substantially to the
computational cost of Pond’s operation. The figures shown are for 512-bit keys, whose
security is good but less than perfect. The results for 1024-bit keys were substantially
worse for the phases of those benchmarks that involved file updates. Other results
obtained with purpose-designed benchmarks included measurement of the impact of the
Byzantine agreement process on the latency of updates. These were in the range of 100
ms to 10 seconds. A test of update throughput achieved a maximum of 100
updates/second.
10.6.3 Ivy file system
Like OceanStore, Ivy [Muthitacharoen et al. 2002] is a read/write file system supporting
multiple readers and writers implemented over an overlay routing layer and a distributed
hash-addressed data store. Unlike OceanStore, the Ivy file system emulates a Sun NFS
server. Ivy stores the state of files as logs of the file update requests issued by Ivy clients
and reconstructs the files by scanning the logs whenever it is unable to satisfy an access
request from its local cache. The log records are held in the DHash distributed hash-
addressed storage service [Dabek et al. 2001]. (Logs were first used to record file
updates in the Sprite distributed operating system [Rosenblum and Ooosterhout 1992],
as described briefly in Section 12.5, but there they were used simply to optimize the
update performance of the file system.)


===== page 474 =====
456 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
Figure 10.16 Ivy system architecture
Ivy node
DHash server
Application Application
DHash server
Ivy server DHash server
DHash server
Modifled
NFS client
module DHash server
Kernel
The design of Ivy resolves several previously unresolved issues arising from the
need to host files in partially trusted or unreliable machines, including:
• The maintenance of consistent file metadata (cf.i-node contents in Unix/NFS file
systems) with potentially concurrent file updates at different nodes. Locking is not
used because the failure of nodes or network connectivity might cause indefinite
blocking.
• Partial trust between participants and vulnerability to attacks of participants’
machines. Recovery from integrity failures caused by such attacks is based on the
notion of views of the file system. A view is a representation of the state
constructed from logs of the updates made by a set of participants. Participants
may be removed and a view recomputed without their updates. Thus a shared file
system is seen as the result of merging all the updates performed by a
(dynamically selected) set of participants.
• Continued operation during partitions in the network, which can result in
conflicting updates to shared files. Conflicting updates are resolved using methods
related to those used in the Coda file system (Section 18.4.3).
Ivy implements an API at each client node that is based on the NFS server protocol
(similar to the set of operations listed in Section 12.3, Figure 12.9). Client nodes include
an Ivy server process that uses DHash to store and access log records at nodes
throughout a local or wide area network based on keys (GUIDs) that are computed as
the hash of the record contents (see Figure 10.16). DHash implements a programming
interface like the one shown in Figure 10.4 and replicates all entries at several nodes for


===== page 475 =====
SECTION 10.6 APPLICATION CASE STUDIES: SQUIRREL, OCEANSTORE, IVY 457
resilience and availability. The Ivy authors note that DHash could in principle be
replaced by another distributed hash-addressed store such as Pastry, Tapestry or CAN.
An Ivy file store consists of a set of update logs, one log per participant. Each Ivy
participant appends only to its own log but can read from all the logs that comprise the
file system. Updates are stored in separate per-participant logs so that they can be rolled
back in case of security breaches or consistency failures.
An Ivy log is a reverse time-ordered linked list of log entries. Each log entry is a
timestamped record of a client request to change the contents or metadata of a file or
directory. DHash uses the 160-bit SHA-1 hash of a record as a key for placing and
retrieving the record. Each participant also maintains a mutable DHash block (called a
log-head) that points to the participant’s most recent log record. Mutable blocks are
assigned a cryptographic public-key pair by their owner. The contents of the block are
signed with the private key and can therefore be authenticated with the corresponding
public key. Ivy uses version vectors (that is, vector timestamps; see Section 14.4) to
impose a total order on log entries when reading from multiple logs.
DHash stores a log record using a SHA-1 hash of its contents as the key. Log
records are chained in timestamp order using the DHash key as a link. The log-head
holds the key for the most recent log entry. To store and retrieve log-heads, a public key
pair is computed by the owner of the log. The public key value is used as its DHash key
and the private key is used by the owner to sign the log-head. Any participant that has
the public key can retrieve the log-head and use it to access all of the records in the log.
Assuming a file system composed of a single log for the moment, the canonical
execution method for a request to read a sequence of bytes from a file requires a
sequential scan of the log to find the log records that contain updates for the relevant
portion of the file. Logs are of unlimited length, but the scan terminates when the first
record or records are found that cover the required sequence of bytes.
The canonical algorithm to access a multi-user, multiple-log file system involves
the comparison of vector timestamps in log records to determine the order of updates
(since a global clock cannot be assumed).
The time taken to perform this process for an operation as simple as a read request
is potentially very long. It is reduced to a more tolerable and predicable duration through
the use of a combination of local caches and snapshots. Snapshots are representations of
the file system computed and stored locally by each participant as a by-product of their
use of the logs. They constitute a soft representation of the file system in the sense that
they may be invalidated if a participant is ejected from the system.
Update consistency is close-to-open; that is, the updates performed on a file by an
application are not visible to other processes until the file is closed. The use of a close-
to-open consistency model enables write operations on a file to be saved at the client
node until the file is closed; then the entire set of write operations is written as a single
log record and a new log-head record is generated and written (an extension to the NFS
protocol enables the occurrence of a close operation in the application to be notified to
the Ivy server).
Since there is a separate Ivy server at each node and each autonomously stores its
updates in a separate log without coordination with the other servers, the serialization of
updates must be done at the time when logs are read in order to construct the content of
files. The version vectors written into log records can be used to order most updates, but


===== page 476 =====
458 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
conflicting updates are possible and they must be resolved by application-specific
automatic or manual methods, as is done in Coda (see Section 18.4.3).
Data integrity is achieved by a combination of the mechanisms that we have
already mentioned: log records are immutable and their address is a secure hash of their
contents; log-heads are verified by checking a public-key signature of their contents. But
the trust model allows for the possibility that a malicious participant may gain access to
a file system. For example, they might delete files that they own maliciously. When this
is detected, the malicious participant is ejected from the view; their log is no longer used
to calculate the contents of the file system and files that they have deleted are once again
visible in the new view.
The Ivy authors used a modified Andrew benchmark [Howard et al. 1988] to
compare the performance of Ivy with a standard NFS server in local and wide area
network environments. They considered (a) Ivy using local DHash servers compared to
a single local NFS server and (b) Ivy using DHash servers located at several remote
Internet sites compared to a single remote NFS server. They also considered the
performance characteristics as a function of the numbers of participants in a view, the
number of participants writing concurrently and the number of DHash servers used to
store the logs.
They found that Ivy execution times were within a factor of two of NFS execution
times for most of the tests in the benchmark and within a factor of three for all of them.
The execution times for the wide area network deployment exceeded those for the local
case by a factor of 10 or more, but similar ratios were obtained for a remote NFS server.
Full details of the performance evaluation can be found in the Ivy paper [Muthitacharoen
et al. 2002]. It should be noted, though, that NFS was not designed for wide area use;
the Andrew File System and other more recently developed server-based systems such
as xFS [Anderson et al. 1996] offer higher performance in wide area deployments and
might have made better bases for the comparison. The primary contribution of Ivy is in
its novel approach to the management of security and integrity in an environment of
partial trust – an inevitable feature of very large distributed systems that span many
organizations and jurisdictions.
10.7 Summary
Peer-to-peer architectures were first shown to support very large scale data sharing with
the Internet-wide use of Napster and its descendants for digital music sharing. The fact
that much of their use conflicted with copyright laws doesn’t diminish their technical
significance, although they did also have technical drawbacks that restricted their
deployment to applications in which guarantees of data integrity and availability were
unimportant.
Subsequent research resulted in the development of peer-to-peer middleware
platforms that deliver requests to data objects wherever they are located in the Internet.
In structured approaches, the objects are addressed using GUIDs, which are pure names
containing no IP addressing information. Objects are placed at nodes according to some
mapping function that is specific to each middleware system. Delivery is performed by
a routing overlay in the middleware that maintains routing tables and forwards requests


===== page 477 =====
EXERCISES 459
along a route determined by calculating distance according to the chosen mapping
function. In unstructured approaches, nodes form themselves into an ad hoc network and
then propagate searches through neighbours to find appropriate resources. Several
strategies have been developed to improve the performance of this search function and
increase the overall scalability of the system.
The middleware platforms add integrity guarantees based on the use of a secure
hash function to generate the GUIDs and availability guarantees based on the replication
of objects at several nodes and on fault-tolerant routing algorithms.
The platforms have been deployed in several large-scale pilot applications, refined
and evaluated. Recent evaluation results indicate that the technology is ready for
deployment in applications involving large numbers of users sharing many data objects.
The benefits of peer-to-peer systems include:
• their ability to exploit unused resources (storage, processing) in the host
computers;
• their scalability to support large numbers of clients and hosts with excellent
balancing of the loads on network links and host computing resources;
• the self-organizing properties of the middleware platforms which result in support
costs that are largely independent of the numbers of clients and hosts deployed.
Weaknesses and subjects of current research include:
• their use for the storage of mutable data is relatively costly compared to a trusted,
centralized service;
• the promising basis that they provide for client and host anonymity has not yet
resulted in strong guarantees of anonymity.
EXERCISES
10.1 Early file-sharing applications such as Napster were restricted in their scalability by the
need to maintain a central index of resources and the hosts that hold them. What other
solutions to the indexing problem can you identify?
pages 428– 430, 435, Section 18.4
10.2 The problem of maintaining indexes of available resources is application-dependent.
Consider the suitability of each of your answers to Exercise 10.1 for:
i) music and media file sharing;
ii) long-term storage of archived material such as journal or newspaper content;
iii)network storage of general-purpose read-write files.
10.3 What are the main guarantees that users expect conventional servers (e.g., web servers
or file servers) to offer? Section 1.5.5
10.4 The guarantees offered by conventional servers may be violated as a result of:
i) physical damage to the host;
ii) Errors or inconsistencies introduced by system administrators or their managers;


===== page 478 =====
460 CHAPTER 10 PEER-TO-PEER SYSTEMS
iii)successful attacks on the security of the system software;
iv)hardware or software errors.
Give two examples of possible incidents for each type of violation. Which of them could
be described as a breach of trust or a criminal act? Would they be breaches of trust if
they occurred on a personal computer that was contributing some resources to a peer-to-
peer service? Why is this relevant for peer-to-peer systems? Section 11.1.1
10.5 Peer-to-peer systems typically depend on untrusted and volatile computer systems for
most of their resources. Trust is a social phenomenon with technical consequences.
Volatility (i.e., unpredictable availability) also is often due to human actions. Elaborate
your answers to Exercise 10.4 by discussing the possible ways in which each of them
are likely to differ according to the following attributes of the computers used:
i) ownership;
ii) geographic location;
iii)network connectivity;
iv)country or jurisdiction.
What does this suggest about policies for the placement of data objects in a peer-to-peer
storage service?
10.6 Assess the availability and trustworthiness of the personal computers in your
environment. You should estimate:
Uptime: How many hours per day is the computer operating and connected to the
Internet?
Software consistency: Is the software managed by a competent technician?
Security: Is the computer fully protected against tampering by its users or others?
Based on your assessment, discuss the feasibility of running a datasharing service on the
set of computers you have assessed and outline the problems that must be addressed in
a peer-to-peer data sharing service. pages 431–432
10.7 Explain why using the secure hash of an object to identify and route messages to it is
tamper-proof. What properties are required of the hash function? How can integrity be
maintained, even if a substantial proportion of peer nodes are subverted?
pages 426, 453, Section 11.4.3
10.8 It is often argued that peer-to-peer systems can offer anonymity for:
i) clients accessing resources;
ii) the hosts providing access to resources.
Discuss each of these propositions. Suggest a way in which the resistance to attacks on
anonymity might be improved. page 429
10.9 Routing algorithms choose a next hop according to an estimate of distance in some
addressing space. Pastry and Tapestry both use circular linear address spaces in which a
function based on the approximate numerical difference between GUIDs determines


===== page 479 =====
EXERCISES 461
their separation. Kademlia uses the XOR of the GUIDs. How does this help in the
maintenance of routing tables? Does the XOR operation provide appropriate properties
for a distance metric? pages 435, [Maymounkov and Mazieres 2002]
10.10 When the Squirrel peer-to-peer web caching service was evaluated by simulation, 4.11
hops were required on average to route a request for a cache entry when simulating the
Redmond traffic, whereas only 1.8 were required for the Cambridge traffic. Explain this
and show that it supports the theoretical performance claimed for Pastry.
pages 436, 450
10.11 In unstructured peer-to-peer systems, significant improvements on search results can be
provided by the adoption of particular search strategies. Compare and contrast expanded
ring search and random walk strategies, highlighting when each approach is likely to be
effective. page 446


===== page 480 =====  [ocr]
This page intentionally left blank


===== page 481 =====
11
SECURITY
11.1 Introduction
11.2 Overview of security techniques
11.3 Cryptographic algorithms
11.4 Digital signatures
11.5 Cryptography pragmatics
11.6 Case studies: Needham–Schroeder, Kerberos, TLS, 802.11 WiFi
11.7 Summary
There is a pervasive need for measures to guarantee the privacy, integrity and availability
of resources in distributed systems. Security attacks take the forms of eavesdropping,
masquerading, tampering and denial of service. Designers of secure distributed systems
must cope with exposed service interfaces and insecure networks in an environment
where attackers are likely to have knowledge of the algorithms used and to deploy
computing resources.
Cryptography provides the basis for the authentication of messages as well as their
secrecy and integrity; carefully designed security protocols are required to exploit it. The
selection of cryptographic algorithms and the management of keys are critical to the
effectiveness, performance and usability of security mechanisms. Public-key
cryptography makes it easy to distribute cryptographic keys but its performance is
inadequate for the encryption of bulk data. Secret-key cryptography is more suitable for
bulk encryption tasks. Hybrid protocols such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) establish
a secure channel using public-key cryptography and then use it to exchange secret keys
for use in subsequent data exchanges.
Digital information can be signed, producing digital certificates. Certificates enable
trust to be established among users and organizations.
The chapter concludes with case studies on the approaches to security system
design and the security mechanisms deployed in Kerberos, TLS/SSL and 802.11 WiFi.
463


===== page 482 =====
464 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
11.1 Introduction
In Section 2.4.3 we introduced a simple model for examining the security requirements
in distributed systems. We concluded that the need for security mechanisms in
distributed systems arises from the desire to share resources. (Resources that are not
shared can generally be protected by isolating them from external access.) If we regard
shared resources as objects, then the requirement is to protect any processes that
encapsulate shared objects and any communication channels that are used to interact
with them against all conceivable forms of attack. The model introduced in Section 2.4.3
provides a good starting point for the identification of security requirements. It can be
summarized as follows:
(cid:129) Processes encapsulate resources (both programming language–level objects and
system-defined resources) and allow clients to access them through interfaces.
Principals (users or other processes) are authorized to operate on resources.
Resources must be protected against unauthorized access (Figure 2.17).
(cid:129) Processes interact through a network that is shared by many users. Enemies
(attackers) can access the network. They can copy or attempt to read any message
transmitted through the network and they can inject arbitrary messages, addressed
to any destination and purporting to come from any source, into the network
(Figure 2.18).
The need to protect the integrity and privacy of information and other resources
belonging to individuals and organizations is pervasive in both the physical and the
digital world. It arises from the desire to share resources. In the physical world,
organizations adopt security policies that provide for the sharing of resources within
specified limits. For example, a company may permit entry to its buildings only to its
employees and accredited visitors. A security policy for documents may specify groups
of employees who can access classes of documents, or it may be defined for individual
documents and users.
Security policies are enforced with the help of security mechanisms. For example,
access to a building may be controlled by a reception clerk, who issues badges to
accredited visitors, and enforced by a security guard or by electronic door locks. Access
to paper documents is usually controlled by concealment and restricted distribution. In
the electronic world, the distinction between security policies and mechanisms is
equally important; without it, it would be difficult to determine whether a particular
system was secure. Security policies are independent of the technology used, just as the
provision of a lock on a door does not ensure the security of a building unless there is a
policy for its use (for example, that the door will be locked whenever nobody is guarding
the entrance). The security mechanisms that we describe here do not in themselves
ensure the security of a system. In Section 11.1.2, we outline the requirements for
security in various simple electronic commerce scenarios, illustrating the need for
policies in that context.
The provision of mechanisms for the protection of data and other resources in
distributed systems while allowing interactions between computers that are permitted
by security policies is the concern of this chapter. The mechanisms that we shall describe
are designed to enforce security policies against the most determined attacks.


===== page 483 =====
SECTION 11.1 INTRODUCTION 465
The role of cryptography • Digital cryptography provides the basis for most computer
security mechanisms, but it is important to note that computer security and cryptography
are distinct subjects. Cryptography is the art of encoding information in a format that
only the intended recipients can decode. Cryptography can also be employed to provide
proof of the authenticity of information, in a manner analogous to the use of signatures
in conventional transactions.
Cryptography has a long and fascinating history. The military need for secure
communication and the corresponding need of an enemy to intercept and decrypt it led
to the investment of much intellectual effort by some of the best mathematical brains of
their time. Readers interested in exploring this history will find absorbing reading in
books on the topic by David Kahn [Kahn 1967, 1983, 1991] and Simon Singh [Singh
1999]. Whitfield Diffie, one of the inventors of public-key cryptography, has written
with firsthand knowledge on the recent history and politics of cryptography [Diffie
1988, Diffie and Landau 1998].
It is only in recent times that cryptography has emerged from the wraps previously
placed on it by the political and military establishments that used to control its
development and use. It is now the subject of open research by a large and active
community, with the results presented in many books, journals and conferences. The
publication of Schneier’s book Applied Cryptography [Schneier 1996] was a milestone
in the opening up of knowledge in the field. It was the first book to publish many
important algorithms with source code – a courageous step, because when the first
edition appeared in 1994 the legal status of such publication was unclear. Schneier’s
book remains the definitive reference on most aspects of modern cryptography. A more
recent book co-authored by Schneier [Ferguson and Schneier 2003] provides an
excellent introduction to computer cryptography and a discursive overview of virtually
all the important algorithms and techniques in current use, including several published
since Schneier’s earlier book. In addition, Menezes et al. [1997] provide a good practical
handbook with a strong theoretical basis and the Network Security Library
[www.secinf.net] is an excellent online source of practical knowledge and experience.
Ross Anderson’s Security Engineering [Anderson 2008] is also outstanding. It is
replete with object lessons on the design of secure systems, drawn from real-world
situations and system security failures.
The new openness is largely a result of the tremendous growth of interest in non-
military applications of cryptography and the security requirements of distributed
computer systems, which has led to the existence for the first time of a self-sustaining
community of cryptographic researchers outside the military domain.
Ironically, the opening of cryptography to public access and use has resulted in a
great improvement in cryptographic techniques, both in their strength to withstand
attacks by enemies and in the convenience with which they can be deployed. Public-key
cryptography is one of the fruits of this openness. As another example, we note that the
DES encryption algorithm that was adopted and used by the US military and
government agencies was initially a military secret. Its eventual publication and
successful efforts to crack it resulted in the development of much stronger secret-key
encryption algorithms.
Another useful spin-off has been the development of a common terminology and
approach. An example of the latter is the adoption of a set of familiar names for
protagonists (principals) involved in the transactions that are to be secured. The use of


===== page 484 =====
466 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.1 Familiar names for the protagonists in security protocols
Alice First participant
Bob Second participant
Carol Participant in three- and four-party protocols
Dave Participant in four-party protocols
Eve Eavesdropper
Mallory Malicious attacker
Sara A server
familiar names for principals and attackers helps to clarify and bring to life descriptions
of security protocols and potential attacks on them, which aids in identifying their
weaknesses. The names shown in Figure 11.1 are used extensively in the security
literature and we use them freely here. We havenot been able to discover their origins;
the earliest occurrence of which we are aware is in the original RSA public-key
cryptography paper [Rivest et al. 1978]. An amusing commentary on their use can be
found in Gordon [1984].
11.1.1 Threats and attacks
Some threats are obvious – for example, in most types of local network it is easy to
construct and run a program on a connected computer that obtains copies of the
messages transmitted between other computers. Other threats are more subtle – if clients
fail to authenticate servers, a program might install itself in place of an authentic file
server and thereby obtain copies of confidential information that clients unwittingly
send to it for storage.
In addition to the danger of loss or damage to information or resources through
direct violations, fraudulent claims may be made against the owner of a system that is
not demonstrably secure. To avoid such claims, the owner must be in a position to
disprove the claim by showing that the system is secure against such violations or by
producing a log of all of the transactions for the period in question. A common instance
is the ‘phantom withdrawal’ problem in automatic cash dispensers (teller machines).
The best answer that a bank can supply to such a claim is to provide a record of the
transaction that is digitally signed by the account holder in a manner that cannot be
forged by a third party.
The main goal of security is to restrict access to information and resources to just
those principals that are authorized to have access. Security threats fall into three broad
classes:
Leakage: Refers to the acquisition of information by unauthorized recipients.
Tampering: Refers to the unauthorized alteration of information.
Vandalism: Refers to interference with the proper operation of a system without gain
to the perpetrator.


===== page 485 =====
SECTION 11.1 INTRODUCTION 467
Attacks on distributed systems depend upon obtaining access to existing communication
channels or establishing new channels that masquerade as authorized connections. (We
use the term channel to refer to any communication mechanism between processes.)
Methods of attack can be further classified according to the way in which a channel is
misused:
Eavesdropping: Obtaining copies of messages without authority.
Masquerading: Sending or receiving messages using the identity of another
principal without their authority.
Message tampering: Intercepting messages and altering their contents before
passing them on to the intended recipient. The man-in-the-middle attack is a form of
message tampering in which an attacker intercepts the very first message in an
exchange of encryption keys to establish a secure channel. The attacker substitutes
compromised keys that enable them to decrypt subsequent messages before re-
encrypting them in the correct keys and passing them on.
Replaying: Storing intercepted messages and sending them at a later date. This
attack may be effective even with authenticated and encrypted messages.
Denial of service: Flooding a channel or other resource with messages in order to
deny access for others.
These are the dangers in theory, but how are attacks carried out in practice? Successful
attacks depend upon the discovery of loopholes in the security of systems.
Unfortunately, these are all too common in today’s systems, and they are not necessarily
particularly obscure. Cheswick and Bellovin [1994] identify 42 weaknesses that they
regard as posing serious risks in widely used Internet systems and components. They
range from password guessing to attacks on the programs that perform the Network
Time Protocol or handle mail transmission. Some of these have led to successful and
well-publicized attacks [Stoll 1989, Spafford 1989], and many of them have been
exploited for mischievous or criminal purposes.
When the Internet and the systems that are connected to it were designed, security
was not a priority. The designers probably had no conception of the scale to which the
Internet would grow, and the basic design of systems such as UNIX predates the advent
of computer networks. As we shall see, the incorporation of security measures needs to
be carefully thought out at the basic design stage, and the material in this chapter is
intended to provide the basis for such thinking.
We focus on the threats to distributed systems that arise from the exposure of their
communication channels and their interfaces. For many systems, these are the only
threats that need to be considered (other than those that arise from human error – security
mechanisms cannot guard against a badly chosen password or one that is carelessly
disclosed). But for systems that include mobile programs and systems whose security is
particularly sensitive to information leakage, there are further threats.
Threats from mobile code • Several recently developed programming languages have
been designed to enable programs to be loaded into a process from a remote server and
then executed locally. In that case, the internal interfaces and objects within an executing
process may be exposed to attack by mobile code.


===== page 486 =====
468 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Java is the most widely used language of this type, and its designers paid
considerable attention to the design and construction of the language and the
mechanisms for remote loading in an effort to restrict the exposure (the sandbox model
of protection against mobile code).
The Java virtual machine (JVM) is designed with mobile code in view. It gives
each application its own environment in which to run. Each environment has a security
manager that determines which resources are available to the application. For example,
the security manager might stop an application reading and writing files or give it
limited access to network connections. Once a security manager has been set, it cannot
be replaced. When a user runs a program such as a browser that downloads mobile code
to be run locally on their behalf, they have no very good reason to trust the code to
behave in a responsible manner. In fact, there is a danger of downloading and running
malicious code that removes files or accesses private information. To protect users
against untrusted code, most browsers specify that applets cannot access local files,
printers or network sockets. Some applications of mobile code are able to assume
various levels of trust in downloaded code. In this case, the security managers are
configured to provide more access to local resources.
The JVM takes two further measures to protect the local environment:
1. The downloaded classes are stored separately from the local classes, preventing
them from replacing local classes with spurious versions.
2. The bytecodes are checked for validity. Valid Java bytecode is composed of Java
virtual machine instructions from a specified set. The instructions are also checked
to ensure that they will not produce certain errors when the program runs, such as
accessing illegal memory addresses.
The security of Java has been the subject of much subsequent investigation, in the course
of which it became clear that the original mechanisms adopted were not free of
loopholes [McGraw and Felden 1999]. The identified loopholes were corrected and the
Java protection system was refined to allow mobile code to access local resources when
authorized to do so [java.sun.com V].
Despite the inclusion of type-checking and code-validation mechanisms, the
security mechanisms incorporated into mobile code systems do not yet produce the same
level of confidence in their effectiveness as those used to protect communication
channels and interfaces. This is because the construction of an environment for
execution of programs offers many opportunities for error, and it is difficult to be
confident that all have been avoided. Volpano and Smith [1999] have pointed out that
an alternative approach, based on proofs that the behaviour of mobile code is sound,
might offer a better solution.
Information leakage • If the transmission of a message between two processes can be
observed, some information can be gleaned from its mere existence – for example, a
flood of messages to a dealer in a particular stock might indicate a high level of trading
in that stock. There are many more subtle forms of information leakage, some malicious
and others arising from inadvertent error. The potential for leakage arises whenever the
results of a computation can be observed. Work was done on the prevention of this type
of security threat in the 1970s [Denning and Denning 1977]. The approach taken is to
assign security levels to information and channels and to analyze the flow of information


===== page 487 =====
SECTION 11.1 INTRODUCTION 469
into channels with the aim of ensuring that high-level information cannot flow into
lower-level channels. A method for the secure control of information flows was first
described by Bell and LaPadula [1975]. The extension of this approach to distributed
systems with mutual distrust between components is the subject of recent research
[Myers and Liskov 1997].
11.1.2 Securing electronic transactions
Many uses of the Internet in industry, commerce and elsewhere involve transactions that
depend crucially on security. For example:
Email: Although email systems did not originally include support for security, there
are many uses of email in which the contents of messages must be kept secret (for
example, when sending a credit card number) or the contents and sender of a message
must be authenticated (for example when submitting an auction bid by email).
Cryptographic security based on the techniques described in this chapter is now
included in many mail clients.
Purchase of goods and services: Such transactions are now commonplace. Buyers
select goods and pay for them via the Web and the goods are delivered through an
appropriate delivery mechanism. Software and other digital products (such as
recordings and videos) can be delivered by downloading. Tangible goods such as
books, CDs and almost every other type of product are also sold by Internet vendors;
these are supplied via a delivery service.
Banking transactions: Electronic banks now offer users virtually all of the facilities
provided by conventional banks. They can check their balances and statements,
transfer money between accounts, set up regular automatic payments and so on.
Micro-transactions: The Internet lends itself to the supply of small quantities of
information and other services to many customers. Most web pages currently can be
viewed without charge, but the development of the Web as a high-quality publishing
medium surely depends upon the ability of information providers to obtain payments
from consumers of the information. Voice and videoconferencing on the Internet is
currently also free, but it is charged for when a telephone network is also involved.
The price for such services may amount to only a fraction of a cent, and the payment
overheads must be correspondingly low. In general, schemes based on the
involvement of a bank or credit card server for each transaction cannot achieve this.
Transactions such as these can be safely performed only when they are protected by
appropriate security policies and mechanisms. A purchaser must be protected against the
disclosure of credit codes (card numbers) during transmission and against fraudulent
vendors who obtain payment with no intention of supplying the goods. Vendors must
obtain payment before releasing the goods, and for downloadable products they must
ensure that only paying customers obtain the data in a usable form. The required
protection must be achieved at a cost that is reasonable in comparison with the value of
the transaction.


===== page 488 =====
470 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Sensible security policies for Internet vendors and buyers lead to the following
requirements for securing web purchases:
1. Authenticate the vendor to the buyer, so that the buyer can be confident that they
are in contact with a server operated by the vendor with whom they intended to
deal.
2. Keep the buyer’s credit card number and other payment details from falling into
the hands of any third party and ensure that they are transmitted unaltered from
the buyer to the vendor.
3. If the goods are in a form suitable for downloading, ensure that their content is
delivered to the buyer without alteration and without disclosure to third parties.
The identity of the buyer is not normally required by the vendor (except for the purpose
of delivering the goods, if they are not downloaded). The vendor will wish to check that
the buyer has sufficient funds to pay for the purchase, but this is usually done by
demanding payment from the buyer’s bank before delivering the goods.
The security needs of banking transactions using an open network are similar to
those for purchase transactions, with the buyer as the account holder and the bank as the
vendor, but there there is a fourth requirement as well:
4. Authenticate the identity of the account holder to the bank before giving them
access to their account.
Note that in this situation, it is important for the bank to ensure that the account holder
cannot deny that they participated in a transaction. Non-repudiation is the name given
to this requirement.
In addition to the above requirements, which are dictated by security policies,
there are some system requirements. These arise from the very large scale of the
Internet, which makes it impractical to require buyers to enter into special relationships
with vendors (by registering encryption keys for later use, etc.). It should be possible for
a buyer to complete a secure transaction with a vendor even if there has been no previous
contact between buyer and vendor and without the involvement of a third party.
Techniques such as the use of ‘cookies’ – records of previous transactions stored on the
user’s client host – have obvious security weaknesses; desktop and mobile hosts are
often located in insecure physical environments.
Because of the importance of security for Internet commerce and the rapid growth
in Internet commerce, we have chosen to illustrate the use of cryptographic security
techniques by describing in Section 11.6 the de facto standard security protocol used in
most electronic commerce – Transport Layer Security (TLS). A description of Millicent,
a protocol specifically designed for micro-transactions, can be found at
www.cdk5.net/security.
Internet commerce is an important application of security techniques, but it is
certainly not the only one. It is needed wherever computers are used by individuals or
organizations to store and communicate important information. The use of encrypted
email for private communication between individuals is a case in point that has been the
subject of considerable political discussion. We refer to this debate in Section 11.5.2.


===== page 489 =====
SECTION 11.1 INTRODUCTION 471
11.1.3 Designing secure systems
Immense strides have been made in recent years in the development of cryptographic
techniques and their application, yet designing secure systems remains an inherently
difficult task. At the heart of this dilemma is the fact that the designer’s aim is to exclude
all possible attacks and loopholes. The situation is analogous to that of the programmer
whose aim is to exclude all bugs from their program. In neither case is there a concrete
method to ensure this goal is met during the design. One designs to the best available
standards and applies informal analysis and checks. Once a design is complete, formal
validation is an option. Work on the formal validation of security protocols has produced
some important results [Lampson et al. 1992, Schneider 1996, Abadi and Gordon 1999].
A description of one of the first steps in this direction, the BAN logic of authentication
[Burrows et al. 1990], and its application can be found at www.cdk5.net/security.
Security is about avoiding disasters and minimizing mishaps. When designing for
security it is necessary to assume the worst. The box on page 472 shows a set of useful
assumptions and design guidelines. These assumptions underly the thinking behind the
techniques that we describe in this chapter.
To demonstrate the validity of the security mechanisms employed in a system, the
system’s designers must first construct a list of threats – methods by which the security
policies might be violated – and show that each of them is prevented by the mechanisms
employed. This demonstration may take the form of an informal argument or, better, a
logical proof.
No list of threats is likely to be exhaustive, so auditing methods must also be used
in security-sensitive applications to detect violations. These are straightforward to
implement if a secure log of security-sensitive system actions is always recorded with
details of the users performing the actions and their authority.
A security log will contain a sequence of timestamped records of users’ actions.
At a minimum the records will include the identity of a principal, the operation
performed (e.g., delete file, update accounting record), the identity of the object
operated on and a timestamp. Where particular violations are suspected, the records may
be extended to include physical resource utilization (network bandwidth, peripherals),
or the logging process may be targeted at operations on particular objects. Subsequent
analysis may be statistical or search-based. Even when no violations are suspected, the
statistics may be compared over time to help to discover any unusual trends or events.
The design of secure systems is an exercise in balancing costs against the threats.
The range of techniques that can be deployed for protecting processes and securing
interprocess communication are strong enough to withstand almost any attack, but their
use incurs expense and inconvenience:
(cid:129) A cost (in terms of computational effort and network usage) is incurred for their
use. The costs must be balanced against the threats.
(cid:129) Inappropriately specified security measures may exclude legitimate users from
performing necessary actions.
Such trade-offs are difficult to identify without compromising security and may seem to
conflict with the advice in the first paragraph of this subsection, but the strength of
security techniques required can be quantified and techniques can be selected based on


===== page 490 =====
472 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
the estimated cost of attacks. The relatively low-cost techniques employed in the
Millicent protocol, described at www.cdk5.net/security provide an example.
As an illustration of the difficulties and mishaps that can arise in the design of
secure systems, we review difficulties that arose with the security design originally
incorporated in the IEEE 802.11 WiFi networking standard in Section 11.6.4.
11.2 Overview of security techniques
The purpose of this section is to introduce the reader to some of the more important
techniques and mechanisms for securing distributed systems and applications. Here we
describe them informally, reserving more rigorous descriptions for Sections 11.3 and
11.4. We use the familiar names for principals introduced in Figure 11.1 and the
notations for encrypted and signed items shown in Figure 11.2.
Worst-case assumptions and design guidelines
Interfaces are exposed: Distributed systems are composed of processes that offer
services or share information. Their communication interfaces are necessarily open
(to allow new clients to access them) – an attacker can send a message to any
interface.
Networks are insecure: For example, message sources can be falsified – messages can
be made to look as though they came from Alice when they were actually sent by
Mallory. Host addresses can be ‘spoofed’ – Mallory can connect to the network with
the same address as Alice and receive copies of messages intended for her.
Limit the lifetime and scope of each secret: When a secret key is first generated we can
be confident that it has not been compromised. The longer we use it and the more
widely it is known, the greater the risk. The use of secrets such as passwords and
shared secret keys should be time-limited, and sharing should be restricted.
Algorithms and program code are available to attackers: The bigger and the more
widely distributed a secret is, the greater the risk of its disclosure. Secret encryption
algorithms are totally inadequate for today’s large-scale network environments. Best
practice is to publish the algorithms used for encryption and authentication, relying
only on the secrecy of cryptographic keys. This helps to ensure that the algorithms
are strong by throwing them open to scrutiny by third parties.
Attackers may have access to large resources: The cost of computing power is rapidly
decreasing. We should assume that attackers will have access to the largest and most
powerful computers projected in the lifetime of a system, then add a few orders of
magnitude to allow for unexpected developments.
Minimize the trusted base: The portions of a system that are responsible for the
implementation of its security, and all the hardware and software components upon
which they rely, have to be trusted – this is often referred to as the trusted computing
base. Any defect or programming error in this trusted base can produce security
weaknesses, so we should aim to minimize its size. For example, application
programs should not be trusted to protect data from their users.


===== page 491 =====
SECTION 11.2 OVERVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNIQUES 473
Figure 11.2 Cryptography notations
K A Alice’s secret key
K B Bob’s secret key
K AB Secret key shared between Alice and Bob
K Apriv Alice’s private key (known only to Alice)
K Apub Alice’s public key (published by Alice for all to read)
{M}K Message M encrypted with key K
[M]K Message M signed with key K
11.2.1 Cryptography
Encryption is the process of encoding a message in such a way as to hide its contents.
Modern cryptography includes several secure algorithms for encrypting and decrypting
messages. They are all based on the use of secrets called keys. A cryptographic key is a
parameter used in an encryption algorithm in such a way that the encryption cannot be
reversed without knowledge of the key.
There are two main classes of encryption algorithm in general use. The first uses
shared secret keys – the sender and the recipient must share a knowledge of the key and
it must not be revealed to anyone else. The second class of encryption algorithms uses
public/private key pairs. Here the sender of a message uses a public key – one that has
already been published by the recipient – to encrypt the message. The recipient uses a
corresponding private key to decrypt the message. Although many principals may
examine the public key, only the recipient can decrypt the message, because they have
the private key.
Both classes of encryption algorithm are extremely useful and are used widely in
the construction of secure distributed systems. Public-key encryption algorithms
typically require 100 to 1000 times as much processing power as secret-key algorithms,
but there are situations where their convenience outweighs this disadvantage.
11.2.2 Uses of cryptography
Cryptography plays three major roles in the implementation of secure systems. We
introduce them here in outline by means of some simple scenarios. In later sections of
this chapter, we describe these and other protocols in greater detail, addressing some
unresolved problems that are merely highlighted here.
In all of our scenarios below, we can assume that Alice, Bob and any other
participants have already agreed about the encryption algorithms that they wish to use
and have implementations of them. We also assume that any secret keys or private keys
that they hold can be stored securely to prevent attackers obtaining them.
Secrecy and integrity • Cryptography is used to maintain the secrecy and integrity of
information whenever it is exposed to potential attacks – for example, during
transmission across networks that are vulnerable to eavesdropping and message
tampering. This use of cryptography corresponds to its traditional role in military and


===== page 492 =====
474 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
intelligence activities. It exploits the fact that a message that is encrypted with a
particular encryption key can only be decrypted by a recipient who knows the
corresponding decryption key. Thus it maintains the secrecy of the encrypted message
as long as the decryption key is not compromised (disclosed to non-participants in the
communication) and provided that the encryption algorithm is strong enough to defeat
any possible attempts to crack it. Encryption also maintains the integrity of the
encrypted information, provided that some redundant information such as a checksum
is included and checked.
Scenario 1. Secret communication with a shared secret key:Alice wishes to send some in-
formation secretly to Bob. Alice and Bob share a secret key K AB.
1. Alice uses K AB and an agreed encryption function E(K AB , M) to encrypt and send
any number of messages {M i}KAB to Bob. (Alice can go on using K AB as long as
it is safe to assume that K AB has not been compromised.)
2. Bob decrypts the encrypted messages using the corresponding decryption function
D(K AB,M).
Bob can now read the original message M. If the decrypted message makes sense, or
better, if it includes some value agreed between Alice and Bob (such as a checksum of
the message) then Bob knows that the message is from Alice and that it hasn’t been
tampered with. But there are still some problems:
Problem 1: How can Alice send a shared key K AB to Bob securely?
Problem 2: How does Bob know that any {M i} isn’t a copy of an earlier encrypted
message from Alice that was captured by Mallory and replayed later? Mallory
needn’t have the key K AB to carry out this attack – he can simply copy the bit pattern
that represents the message and send it to Bob later. For example, if the message is a
request to pay some money to someone, Mallory might trick Bob into paying twice.
We show how these problems can be resolved later in this chapter.
Authentication • Cryptography is used in support of mechanisms for authenticating
communication between pairs of principals. A principal who decrypts a message
successfully using a particular key can assume that the message is authentic if it contains
a correct checksum or (if the block-chaining mode of encryption, described in Section
11.3, is used) some other expected value. They can infer that the sender of the message
possessed the corresponding encryption key and hence deduce the identity of the sender
if the key is known only to two parties. Thus if keys are held in private, a successful
decryption authenticates the decrypted message as coming from a particular sender.
Scenario 2. Authenticated communication with a server:Alice wishes to access files held
by Bob, a file server on the local network of the organization where she works. Sara is
an authentication server that is securely managed. Sara issues users with passwords and
holds current secret keys for all of the principals in the system it serves (generated by
applying some transformation to the user’s password). For example, it knows Alice’s
keyK A and Bob’s K B. In our scenario we refer to a ticket. A ticket is an encrypted item
issued by an authentication server, containing the identity of the principal to whom it is
issued and a shared key that has been generated for the current communication session.


===== page 493 =====
SECTION 11.2 OVERVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNIQUES 475
1. Alice sends an (unencrypted) message to Sara stating her identity and requesting
a ticket for access to Bob.
2. Sara sends a response to Alice encrypted in K A consisting of a ticket (to be sent to
Bob with each request for file access) encrypted in K B and a new secret key K AB
for use when communicating with Bob. So the response that Alice receives looks
like this: {{Ticket}KB , K AB}KA .
3. Alice decrypts the response using K A (which she generates from her password
using the same transformation; the password is not transmitted over the network,
and once it has been used it is deleted from local storage to avoid compromising
it). If Alice has the correct password-derived key K A, she obtains a valid ticket for
using Bob’s service and a new encryption key for use in communicating with Bob.
Alice can’t decrypt or tamper with the ticket, because it is encrypted in K B. If the
recipient isn’t Alice then they won’t know Alice’s password, so they won’t be able
to decrypt the message.
4. Alice sends the ticket to Bob together with her identity and a request R to access
a file: {Ticket}KB , Alice, R.
5. The ticket, originally created by Sara, is actually: {K AB , Alice}KB . Bob decrypts
the ticket using his key K B. So Bob gets the authentic identity of Alice (based on
the knowledge shared between Alice and Sara of Alice’s password) and a new
shared secret key K AB for use when interacting with Alice. (This is called a session
key because it can safely be used by Alice and Bob for a sequence of interactions.)
This scenario is a simplified version of the authentication protocol originally developed
by Roger Needham and Michael Schroeder [1978] and subsequently used in the
Kerberos system developed and used at MIT [Steiner et al. 1988], which is described in
Section 11.6.2. In our simplified description of their protocol above there is no
protection against the replay of old authentication messages. This and some other
weaknesses are dealt with in our description of the full Needham–Schroeder protocol in
Section11.6.1.
The authentication protocol we have described depends upon prior knowledge by
the authentication server Sara of Alice’s and Bob’s keys, K A and K B. This is feasible in
a single organization where Sara runs on a physically secure computer and is managed
by a trusted principal who generates initial values of the keys and transmits them to users
by a separate secure channel. But it isn’t appropriate for electronic commerce or other
wide area applications, where the use of a separate channel is extremely inconvenient
and the requirement for a trusted third party is unrealistic. Public-key cryptography
rescues us from this dilemma.
The usefulness of challenges: An important aspect of Needham and Schroeder’s 1978
breakthrough was the realization that a user’s password does not have to be submitted
to an authentication service (and hence exposed in the network) each time it is
authenticated. Instead, they introduced the concept of a cryptographic challenge. This
can be seen in step 2 of our scenario above, where the server, Sara, issues a ticket to
Alice encrypted in Alice’s secret key, K A. This constitutes a challenge because Alice
cannot make use of the ticket unless she can decrypt it, and she can only decrypt it if she


===== page 494 =====
476 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
can determine K A, which is derived from Alice’s password. An imposter claiming to be
Alice would be defeated at this point.
Scenario 3. Authenticated communication with public keys:Assuming that Bob has gener-
ated a public/private key pair, the following dialogue enables Bob and Alice to establish
a shared secret key, K AB:
1. Alice accesses a key distribution service to obtain a public-key certificate giving
Bob’s public key. It’s called a certificate because it is signed by a trusted authority
– a person or organization that is widely known to be reliable. After checking the
signature, she reads Bob’s public key, K Bpub, from the certificate. (We discuss the
construction and use of public-key certificates in Section 11.2.3.)
2. Alice creates a new shared key, K AB, and encrypts it using K Bpub with a public-
key algorithm. She sends the result to Bob, along with a name that uniquely
identifies a public/private key pair (since Bob may have several of them) – that is,
Alice sends keyname,{K AB}KBpub .
3. Bob selects the corresponding private key, K Bpriv, from his private key store and
uses it to decrypt K AB. Note that Alice’s message to Bob might have been
corrupted or tampered with in transit. The consequence would simply be that Bob
and Alice don’t share the same key K AB. If this is a problem, it can be
circumvented by adding an agreed value or string to the message, such as Bob’s
and Alice’s names or email addresses, which Bob can check after decrypting.
The above scenario illustrates the use of public-key cryptography to distribute a shared
secret key. This technique is known as a hybrid cryptographic protocol and is very
widely used, since it exploits useful features of both public-key and secret-key
encryption algorithms.
Problem: This key exchange is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks. Mallory
may intercept Alice’s initial request to the key distribution service for Bob’s public-
key certificate and send a response containing his own public key. He can then
intercept all the subsequent messages. In our description above, we guard against this
attack by requiring Bob’s certificate to be signed by a well-known authority. To
protect against this attack, Alice must ensure that Bob’s public-key certificate is
signed with a public key (as described below) that she has received in a totally secure
manner.
Digital signatures • Cryptography is used to implement a mechanism known as a
digital signature. This emulates the role of a conventional signature, verifying to a third
party that a message or a document is an unaltered copy of one produced by the signer.
Digital signature techniques are based upon an irreversible binding to the message
or document of a secret known only to the signer. This can be achieved by encrypting
the message – or better, a compressed form of the message called a digest – using a key
that is known only to the signer. A digest is a fixed-length value computed by applying
asecure digest function. A secure digest function is similar to a checksum function, but
it is very unlikely to produce a similar digest value for two different messages. The
resulting encrypted digest acts as a signature that accompanies the message. Public-key
cryptography is generally used for this: the originator generates a signature with their
private key, and the signature can be decrypted by any recipient using the corresponding


===== page 495 =====
SECTION 11.2 OVERVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNIQUES 477
Figure 11.3 Alice’s bank account certificate
1.Certificate type: Account number
2.Name: Alice
3.Account: 6262626
4.Certifying authority: Bob’s Bank
5.Signature: {Digest(field 2 + field 3)}KBpriv
public key. There is an additional requirement: the verifier should be sure that the public
key really is that of the principal claiming to be the signer – this is dealt with by the use
of public-key certificates, described in Section 11.2.3.
Scenario 4. Digital signatures with a secure digest function:Alice wants to sign a document
M so that any subsequent recipient can verify that she is the originator of it. Thus when
Bob later accesses the signed document after receiving it by any route and from any
source (for example, it could be sent in a message or it could be retrieved from a
database), he can verify that Alice is the originator.
1. Alice computes a fixed-length digest of the document, Digest(M).
2. Alice encrypts the digest in her private key, appends it to M and makes the result,
M, {Digest(M)}KApriv , available to the intended users.
3. Bob obtains the signed document, extracts M and computes Digest(M).
4. Bob decrypts {Digest(M)}KApriv using Alice’s public key, K Apub, and compares
the result with his calculated Digest(M). If they match, the signature is valid.
11.2.3 Certificates
A digital certificate is a document containing a statement (usually short) signed by a
principal. We illustrate the concept with a scenario.
Scenario 5. The use of certificates:Bob is a bank. When his customers establish contact
with him they need to be sure that they are talking to Bob the bank, even if they have
never contacted him before. Bob needs to authenticate his customers before he gives
them access to their accounts.
For example, Alice might find it useful to obtain a certificatefrom her bank stating
her bank account number (Figure 11.3). Alice could use this certificate when shopping
to certify that she has an account with Bob’sBank. The certificate is signed using Bob’s
private key, K Bpriv. A vendor, Carol, can accept such a certificate for charging items to
Alice’s account provided that she can validate the signature in field 5. To do so, Carol
needs to have Bob’s public key and she needs to be sure that it is authentic to guard
against the possibility that Alice might sign a false certificate associating her name with
someone else’s account. To carry out this attack, Alice would simply generate a new key
pair, K B'pub, K B'priv, and use them to generate a forged certificate purporting to come
from Bob’s Bank.


===== page 496 =====
478 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.4 Public-key certificate for Bob’s Bank
1.Certificate type: Public key
2.Name: Bob’s Bank
3.Public key: K
Bpub
4.Certifying authority: Fred – The Bankers Federation
5.Signature: {Digest(field 2 + field 3)}KFpriv
What Carol needs is a certificate stating Bob’s public key, signed by a well-known
and trusted authority. Let us assume that Fred represents the Bankers Federation, one of
whose roles is to certify the public keys of banks. Fred could issue a public-key
certificate for Bob (Figure 11.4).
Of course, this certificate depends upon the authenticity of Fred’s public key,
K Fpub, so we have a recursive problem of authenticity – Carol can only rely on this
certificate if she can be sure she knows Fred’s authentic public key, K Fpub. We can break
this recursion by ensuring that Carol obtains K Fpub by some means in which she can
have confidence – she might be handed it by a representative of Fred or she might
receive a signed copy of it from someone she knows and trusts who says they got it
directly from Fred. Our example illustrates a certification chain – one with two links, in
this case.
We have already alluded to one of the problems arising with certificates – the
difficulty of choosing a trusted authority from which a chain of authentications can start.
Trust is seldom absolute, so the choice of an authority must depend upon the purpose to
which the certificate is to be put. Other problems arise over the risk of private keys being
compromised (disclosed) and the permissible length of a certification chain – the longer
the chain, the greater the risk of a weak link.
Provided that care is taken to address these issues, chains of certificates are an
important cornerstone for electronic commerce and other kinds of real-world
transaction. They help to address the problem of scale: there are six billion people in the
world, so how can we construct an electronic environment in which we can establish the
credentials of any of them?
Certificates can be used to establish the authenticity of many types of statement.
For example, the members of a group or association might wish to maintain an email list
that is open only to members of the group. A good way to do this would be for the
membership manager (Bob) to issue a membership certificate (S,Bob,{Digest(S)}KBpriv )
to each member, where S is a statement of the form Alice is a member of the Friendly
Society and K Bpriv is Bob’s private key. A member applying to join the Friendly Society
email list would have to supply a copy of this certificate to the list management system,
which checks the certificate before allowing the member to join the list.
To make certificates useful,two things are needed:
(cid:129) a standard format and representation for them so that certificate issuers and
certificate users can successfully construct and interpret them;


===== page 497 =====
SECTION 11.2 OVERVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNIQUES 479
(cid:129) agreement on the manner in which chains of certificates are constructed, and in
particular the notion of a trusted authority.
We return to these requirements in Section 11.4.4.
There is sometimes a need to revoke a certificate – for example, Alice might
discontinue her membership of the Friendly Society, but she and others would probably
continue to hold stored copies of her membership certificate. It would be expensive, if
not impossible, to track down and delete all such certificates, and it is not easy to
invalidate a certificate – it would be necessary to notify all possible recipients of the
revocation. The usual solution to this problem is to include an expiry date in the
certificate. Anyone receiving an expired certificate should reject it, and the subject of
the certificate must request its renewal. If a more rapid revocation is required, then one
of the more cumbersome mechanisms mentioned above must be resorted to.
11.2.4 Access control
Here we outline the concepts on which the control of access to resources is based in
distributed systems and the techniques by which it is implemented. The conceptual basis
for protection and access control was very clearly set out in a classic paper by Lampson
[1971], and details of non-distributed implementations can be found in many books on
operating systems (see e.g., [Stallings 2008]).
Historically, the protection of resources in distributed systems has been largely
service-specific. Servers receive request messages of the form <op, principal,
resource>, where op is the requested operation, principal is an identity or a set of
credentials for the principal making the request and resource identifies the resource to
which the operation is to be applied. The server must first authenticate the request
message and the principal’s credentials and then apply access control, refusing any
request for which the requesting principal does not have the necessary access rights to
perform the requested operation on the specified resource.
In object-oriented distributed systems there may be many types of object to which
access control must be applied, and the decisions are often application-specific. For
example, Alice may be allowed only one cash withdrawal from her bank account per
day, while Bob is allowed three. Access control decisions are usually left to the
application-level code, but generic support is provided for much of the machinery that
supports the decisions. This includes the authentication of principals, the signing and
authentication of requests, and the management of credentials and access rights data.
Protectiondomains • A protection domain is an execution environment shared by a
collection of processes: it contains a set of <resource, rights> pairs, listing the resources
that can be accessed by all processes executing within the domain and specifying the
operations permitted on each resource. A protection domain is usually associated with a
given principal – when a user logs in, their identity is authenticated and a protection
domain is created for the processes that they will run. Conceptually, the domain includes
all of the access rights that the principal possesses, including any rights that they acquire
through membership of various groups. For example, in UNIX, the protection domain
of a process is determined by the user and group identifiers attached to the process at
login time. Rights are specified in terms of allowed operations. For example, a file might
be readable and writable by one process and only readable by another.


===== page 498 =====
480 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
A protection domain is only an abstraction. Two alternative implementations are
commonly used in distributed systems: capabilities and access control lists.
Capabilities: A set of capabilities is held by each process according to the domain in
which it is located. A capability is a binary value that acts as an access key, allowing the
holder access to certain operations on a specified resource. For use in distributed
systems, where capabilities must be unforgeable, they take a form such as:
Resource identifier A unique identifier for the target resource
Operations A list of the operations permitted on the resource
Authentication code A digital signature making the capability unforgeable
Services only supply capabilities to clients when they have authenticated them as
belonging to the claimed protection domain. The list of operations in the capability is a
subset of the operations defined for the target resource and is often encoded as a bit map.
Different capabilities are used for different combinations of access rights to the same
resource.
When capabilities are used, client requests are of the form <op, userid,
capability>. That is, they include a capability for the resource to be accessed instead of
a simple identifier, giving the server immediate proof that the client is authorized to
access the resource identified by the capability with the operations specified by the
capability. An access-control check on a request that is accompanied by a capability
involves only the validation of the capability and a check that the requested operation is
in the set permitted by the capability. This feature is the major advantage of capabilities
– they constitute a self-contained access key, just as a physical key to a door lock is an
access key to the building that the lock protects.
Capabilities share two drawbacks of keys to a physical lock:
Key theft: Anyone who holds the key to a building can use it to gain access, whether
or not they are an authorized holder of the key – they may have stolen the key or
obtained it in some fraudulent manner.
The revocation problem: The entitlement to hold a key changes with time. For
example, the holder may cease to be an employee of the owner of the building, but
they might retain the key, or a copy of it, and use it in an unauthorized manner.
The only available solutions to these problems for physical keys are (a) to put the illicit
key holder in jail – not always feasible on a timescale that will prevent them doing
damage – or (b) to change the lock and reissue keys to all key holders – a clumsy and
expensive operation.
The analogous problems for capabilities are clear:
(cid:129) Capabilities may, through carelessness or as a result of an eavesdropping attack,
fall into the hands of principals other than those to whom they were issued. If this
happens, servers are powerless to prevent them being used illicitly.
(cid:129) Itis difficult to cancel capabilities. The status of the holder may change and their
access rights should change accordingly, but they can still use their capabilities.
Solutions to both of these problems, based on the inclusion of information identifying
the holder and on timeouts plus lists of revoked capabilities, respectively, have been
proposed and developed [Gong 1989, Hayton et al. 1998]. Although they add


===== page 499 =====
SECTION 11.2 OVERVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNIQUES 481
complexity to an otherwise simple concept, capabilities remain an important technique
– for example, they can be used in conjunction with access control lists to optimize
access control on repeated access to the same resource, and they provide the neatest
mechanism for the implementation of delegation (see Section 11.2.5).
It is interesting to note the similarity between capabilities and certificates.
Consider Alice’s certificate of ownership of her bank account introduced in Section
11.2.3. It differs from capabilities as described here only in that there is no list of
permitted operations and that the issuer is identified. Certificates and capabilities may
be interchangeable concepts in some circumstances. Alice’s certificate might be
regarded as an access key allowing her to perform all the operations permitted to account
holders on her bank account, provided her identity can be proven.
Access control lists: A list is stored with each resource, containing an entry of the form
<domain, operations> for each domain that has access to the resource and giving the
operations permitted to the domain. A domain may be specified by an identifier for a
principal or it may be an expression that can be used to determine a principal’s
membership of the domain. For example, the owner of this file is an expression that can
be evaluated by comparing the requesting principal’s identity with the owner’s identity
stored with a file.
This is the scheme adopted in most file systems, including UNIX and
WindowsNT, where a set of access permission bits is associated with each file, and the
domains to which the permissions are granted are defined by reference to the ownership
information stored with each file.
Requests to servers are of the form <op, principal, resource>. For each request,
the server authenticates the principal and checks to see that the requested operation is
included in the principal’s entry in the access control list of the relevant resource.
Implementation • Digital signatures, credentials and public-key certificates provide the
cryptographic basis for secure access control. Secure channels offer performance
benefits, enabling multiple requests to be handled without a need for repeated checking
of principals and credentials [Wobber et al. 1994].
Both CORBA and Java offer Security APIs. Support for access control is one of
their major purposes. Java provides support for distributed objects to manage their own
access control with Principal, Signer and ACL classes and default methods for
authentication and support for certificates, signature validation and access-control
checks. Secret-key and public-key cryptography are also supported. Farley [1998]
provides a good introduction to these features of Java. The protection of Java programs
that include mobile code is based upon the protection domain concept – local code and
downloaded code are provided with different protection domains in which to execute.
There can be a protection domain for each download source, with access rights for
different sets of local resources depending upon the level of trust that is placed in the
downloaded code.
Corba offers a Security Service specification [Blakley 1999, OMG 2002b] with a
model for ORBs to provide secure communication, authentication, access control with
credentials, ACLs and auditing; these are described further in Section 8.3.


===== page 500 =====
482 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
11.2.5 Credentials
Credentials are a set of evidence provided by a principal when requesting access to a
resource. In the simplest case, a certificate from a relevant authority stating the
principal’s identity is sufficient, and this would be used to check the principal’s
permissions in an access control list (see Section 11.2.4). This is often all that is required
or provided, but the concept can be generalized to deal with many more subtle
requirements.
It is not convenient to require users to interact with the system and authenticate
themselves each time their authority is required to perform an operation on a protected
resource. Instead, the notion that a credential speaks for a principal is introduced. Thus
a user’s public-key certificate speaks for that user – any process receiving a request
authenticated with the user’s private key can assume that the request was issued by that
user.
The speaks for idea can be carried much further. For example, in a cooperative
task, it might be required that certain sensitive actions should only be performed with
the authority of two members of the team; in that case, the principal requesting the action
would submit their own identifying credential and a backing credential from another
member of the team, together with an indication that they are to be taken together when
checking the credentials.
Similarly, to vote in an election, a vote request would be accompanied by an
elector certificate as well as an identifying certificate. A delegation certificate allows a
principal to act on behalf of another, and so on. In general, an access-control check
involves the evaluation of a logical formula combining the certificates supplied.
Lampsonet al. [1992] have developed a comprehensive logic of authentication for use
in evaluating the speaks for authority carried by a set of credentials. Wobber et al. [1994]
describe a system that supports this very general approach. Further work on useful forms
of credential for use in real-world cooperative tasks can be found in Rowley [1998].
Role-based credentials seem particularly useful in the design of practical access
control schemes [Sandhu et al. 1996]. Sets of role-based credentials are defined for
organizations or for cooperative tasks, and application-level access rights are
constructed with reference to them. Roles can then be assigned to specific principals by
the generation of role certificates associating principals with named roles in specific
tasks or organizations [Coulouris et al. 1998].
Delegation • A particularly useful form of credential is one that entitles a principal, or
a process acting for a principal, to perform an action with the authority of another
principal. A need for delegation can arise in any situation where a service needs to
access a protected resource in order to complete an action on behalf of its client.
Consider the example of a print server that accepts requests to print files. It would be
wasteful of resources to copy the file, so the name of the file is passed to the print server
and it is accessed by the print server on behalf of the user making the request. If the file
is read-protected, this does not work unless the print server can acquire temporary rights
to read the file. Delegation is a mechanism designed to solve problems such as this.
Delegation can be achieved using a delegation certificate or a capability. The
certificate is signed by the requesting principal and it authorizes another principal (the
print server in our example) to access a named resource (the file to be printed). In
systems that support them, capabilities can achieve the same result without the need to


===== page 501 =====
SECTION 11.2 OVERVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNIQUES 483
identify the principals – a capability to access a resource can be passed in a request to a
server. The capability is an unforgeable, encoded set of rights to access the resource.
When rights are delegated, it is common to restrict them to a subset of the rights
held by the issuing principal, so that the delegated principal cannot misuse them. In our
example, the certificate could be time-limited to reduce the risk of the print server’s code
subsequently being compromised and the file disclosed to third parties. The CORBA
Security Service includes a mechanism for the delegation of rights based on certificates,
with support for the restriction of the rights carried.
11.2.6 Firewalls
Firewalls were introduced and described in Section 3.4.8. They protect intranets,
performing filtering actions on incoming and outgoing communications. Here we
discuss their advantages and drawbacks as security mechanisms.
In an ideal world, communication would always be between mutually trusting
processes and secure channels would always be used. There are many reasons why this
ideal is not attainable, some fixable, but others inherent in the open nature of distributed
systems or resulting from the errors that are present in most software. The ease with
which request messages can be sent to any server, anywhere, and the fact that many
servers are not designed to withstand malicious attacks from hackers or accidental
errors, makes it easy for information that is intended to be confidential to leak out of the
owning organization’s servers. Undesirable items can also penetrate an organization’s
network, allowing worm programs and viruses to enter its computers. See
[web.mit.eduII] for a further critique of firewalls.
Firewalls produce a local communication environment in which all external
communication is intercepted. Messages are forwarded to the intended local recipient
only for communications that are explicitly authorized.
Access to internal networks may be controlled by firewalls, but access to public
services on the Internet is unrestricted because their purpose is to offer services to a wide
range of users. The use of firewalls offers no protection against attacks from inside an
organization, and it is crude in its control of external access. There is a need for finer-
grained security mechanisms, enabling individual users to share information with
selected others without compromising privacy and integrity. Abadi et al. [1998]
describe an approach to the provision of access to private web data for external users
based on a web tunnel mechanism that can be integrated with a firewall. It offers access
for trusted and authenticated users to internal web servers via a secure proxy based on
the HTTPS (HTTP over TLS) protocol.
Firewalls are not particularly effective against denial-of-service attacks such as
the one based on IP spoofing that was outlined in Section 3.4.2. The problem is that the
flood of messages generated by such attacks overwhelms any single point of defence
such as a firewall. Any remedy for incoming floods of messages must be applied well
upstream of the target. Remedies based on the use of quality of service mechanisms to
restrict the flow of messages from the network to a level that the target can handle seem
the most promising.


===== page 502 =====
484 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
11.3 Cryptographic algorithms
A message is encrypted by the sender applying some rule to transform the plaintext
message (any sequence of bits) to a ciphertext (a different sequence of bits). The
recipient must know the inverse rule in order to transform the ciphertext back into the
original plaintext. Other principals are unable to decipher the message unless they also
know the inverse rule. The encryption transformation is defined with two parts, a
functionE and a keyK. The resulting encrypted message is written (cid:94)M(cid:96) .
K
E(cid:11)K(cid:15)M(cid:12) = (cid:94)M(cid:96)
K
The encryption function E defines an algorithm that transforms data items in plaintext
into encrypted data items by combining them with the key and transposing them in a
manner that is heavily dependent on the value of the key. We can think of an encryption
algorithm as the specification of a large family of functions from which a particular
member is selected by any given key. Decryption is carried out using an inverse function
D, which also takes a key as a parameter. For secret-key encryption, the key used for
decryption is the same as that used for encryption:
D(cid:11)K(cid:15)E(cid:11)K(cid:15)M(cid:12)(cid:12) = M
Because of its symmetrical use of keys, secret-key cryptography is often referred to as
symmetric cryptography, whereas public-key cryptography is referred to as asymmetric
because the keys used for encryption and decryption are different, as we shall see below.
In the next section, we describe several widely used encryption functions of both types.
Symmetric algorithms • If we remove the key parameter from consideration by defining
F (cid:11)(cid:62)M(cid:64)(cid:12) = E(cid:11)K(cid:15)M(cid:12), then it is a property of strong encryption functions that
K
F (cid:11)(cid:62)M(cid:64)(cid:12)is relatively easy to compute, whereas the inverse, F–1 (cid:11)(cid:62)M(cid:64)(cid:12), is so hard to
K K
compute that it is not feasible. Such functions are known as one-way functions. The
effectiveness of any method for encrypting information depends upon the use of an
encryption function F K that has this one-way property. It is this that protects against
attacks designed to discover M given (cid:94)M(cid:96) .
K
For well-designed symmetric algorithms such as those described in the next
section, their strength against attempts to discover K given a plaintext M and the
corresponding ciphertext (cid:94)M(cid:96) depends on the size of K. This is because the most
K
effective general form of attackis the crudest, known as a brute-force attack. The brute-
force approach is to run through all possible values of K, computing E(cid:11)K(cid:15)M(cid:12) until the
result matches the value of (cid:94)M(cid:96) that is already known. If K has N bits then such an
N–1 K N
attack requires 2 iterations on average, and a maximum of 2 iterations, to find K.
Hence the time to crack K is exponential in the number of bits in K.
Asymmetric algorithms • When a public/private key pair is used, one-way functions are
exploited in another way. The feasibility of a public-key scheme was first proposed by
Diffie and Hellman [1976] as a cryptographic method that eliminates the need for trust
between the communicating parties. The basis for all public-key schemes is the
existence of trap-door functions. A trap-door function is a one-way function with a
secret exit – it is easy to compute in one direction but infeasible to compute the inverse
unless a secret is known. It was the possibility of finding such functions and using them


===== page 503 =====
SECTION 11.3 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS 485
Figure 11.5 Cipher block chaining
plaintext blocks n+3 n+2 n+1 XOR
E(K, M)
ciphertext blocks n–3 n–2 n–1 n
in practical cryptography that Diffie and Hellman first suggested. Since then, several
practical public-key schemes have been proposed and developed. They all depend upon
the use of trap-door functions involving large numbers.
The pair of keys needed for asymmetric algorithms is derived from a common
root. For the RSA algorithm, described in Section 11.3.2, the root is an arbitrarily chosen
pair of very large prime numbers. The derivation of the pair of keys from the root is a
one-way function. In the case of the RSA algorithm, the large primes are multiplied
together – a computation that takes only a few seconds, even for the very large primes
used. The resulting product, N, is of course much larger than the multiplicands. This use
of multiplication is a one-way function in the sense that it is computationally infeasible
to derive the original multiplicands from the product – that is, to factorize the product.
One of the pair of keys is used for encryption. For RSA, the encryption function
obscures the plaintext by treating each block of bits as a binary number and raising it to
the power of the key, modulo N. The resulting number is the corresponding ciphertext
block.
The size of N and at least one of the pair of keys is much larger than the safe key
size for symmetric keys to ensure that N is not factorizable. For this reason, the potential
for brute-force attacks on RSA is small; its resistance to attacks depends on the
infeasibility of factorizing N. We discuss safe sizes for N in Section 11.3.2.
Block ciphers • Most encryption algorithms operate on fixed-size blocks of data; 64 bits
is a popular size for the blocks. A message is subdivided into blocks, the last block is
padded to the standard length if necessary and each block is encrypted independently.
The first block is available for transmission as soon as it has been encrypted.
For a simple block cipher, the value of eachblock of ciphertext does not depend
upon the preceding blocks. This constitutes a weakness, since an attacker can recognize
repeated patterns and infer their relationship to the plaintext. Nor is the integrity of
messages guaranteed unless a checksum or secure digest mechanism is used. Most block
cipher algorithms employ cipher block chaining (CBC) to overcome these weaknesses.
Cipher block chaining: In cipher block chaining mode, each plaintext block is combined
with the preceding ciphertext block using the exclusive-or operation (XOR) before it is
encrypted (Figure 11.5). On decryption, the block is decrypted and then the preceding
encrypted block (which should have been stored for this purpose) is XOR-ed with it to
obtain the new plaintext block. This works because the XOR operation is its own inverse
– two applications of it produce the original value.
CBC is intended to prevent identical portions of plaintext encrypting to identical
pieces of ciphertext. But there is a weakness at the start of each sequence of blocks – if


===== page 504 =====
486 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.6 Stream cipher
keystream
number
generator n+3 n+2 n+1 E(K, M) buffer
XOR
ciphertext
plaintext
stream
stream
we open encrypted connections to two destinations and send the same message, the
encrypted sequences of blocks will be the same, and an eavesdropper might gain some
useful information from this. To prevent this, we need to insert a different piece of
plaintext in front of each message. Such text is called an initialization vector. A
timestamp makes a good initialization vector, forcing each message to start with a
different plaintext block. This, combined with CBC operation, will result in different
ciphertexts even for two identical plaintexts.
The use of CBC mode is restricted to the encryption of data that is transferred
across a reliable connection. Decryption will fail if any blocks of ciphertext are lost,
since the decryption process will be unable to decrypt any further blocks. It is therefore
unsuitable for use in applications such as those described in Chapter 18, in which some
data loss can be tolerated. A stream cipher should be used in such circumstances.
Stream ciphers • For some applications, such as the encryption of telephone
conversations, encryption in blocks is inappropriate because the data streams are
produced in real time in small chunks. Data samples can be as small as 8 bits or even a
single bit, and it would be wasteful to pad each of these to 64 bits before encrypting and
transmitting them. Stream ciphers are encryption algorithms that can perform
encryption incrementally, converting plaintext to ciphertext one bit at a time.
This sounds difficult to achieve, but in fact it is very simple to convert a block
cipher algorithm for use as a stream cipher. The trick is to construct a keystream
generator. A keystream is an arbitrary-length sequence of bits that can be used to
obscure the contents of a data stream by XOR-ing the keystream with the data stream
(Figure 11.6). If the keystream is secure, then so is the resulting encrypted data stream.
The idea is analogous to a technique used in the intelligence community to foil
eavesdroppers,where ‘white noise’ is played to hide the conversation in a room while
still recording the conversation. If the noisy room sound and the white noise are recorded
separately, the conversation can be played back without noise by subtracting the white
noise recording from the noisy room recording.
A keystream generator can be constructed by iterating a mathematical function
over a range of input values to produce a continuous stream of output values. The output
values are then concatenated to make plaintext blocks, and the blocks are encrypted
using a key shared by the sender and the receiver. The keystream can be further
disguised by applying CBC. The resulting encrypted blocks are used as the keystream.
An iteration of almost any function that delivers a range of different non-integer values
will do for the source material, but a random number generator is generally used with a
starting value for the iteration agreed between the sender and receiver. To maintain
quality of service for the data stream, the keystream blocks should be produced a little


===== page 505 =====
SECTION 11.3 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS 487
ahead of the time at which they will be used, and the process that produces them should
not demand so much processing effort that the data stream is delayed.
Thus in principle, real-time data streams can be encrypted just as securely as
batched data, provided that sufficient processing power is available to encrypt the
keystream in real time. Of course, some devices that could benefit from real-time
encryption, such as mobile phones, are not equipped with very powerful processors, and
in that case it may be necessary to reduce the security of the keystream algorithm.
Design of cryptographic algorithms • There are many well-designed cryptographic
algorithms such that E(cid:11)K(cid:15)M(cid:12) = (cid:94)M(cid:96) conceals the value of M and makes it
K
practically impossible to retrieve K more quickly than by brute force. All encryption
algorithms rely on information-preserving manipulations of M using principles based on
information theory [Shannon 1949]. Schneier [1996] describes Shannon’s principles of
confusion and diffusion to conceal the content of a ciphertext block M, combining it with
a key K of sufficient size to render it proof against brute-force attacks.
Confusion: Non-destructive operations such as XOR and circular shifting are used to
combine each block of plaintext with the key, producing a new bit pattern that obscures
the relationship between the blocks in M and {M}K. If the blocks are larger than a few
characters this will defeat analysis based on a knowledge of character frequencies. (The
WWII German Enigma machine used chained single-letter blocks, and was eventually
defeated by statistical analysis.)
Diffusion: There is usually repetition and redundancy in the plaintext. Diffusion
dissipates the regular patterns that result by transposing portions of each plaintext block.
If CBC is used, the redundancy is also distributed throughout a longer text. Stream
ciphers cannot use diffusion since there are no blocks.
In the next two sections, we describe the design of several important practical
algorithms. All of them have been designed in the light of the above principles have been
subject to rigorous analysis and are considered to be secure against all known attacks
with a considerable margin of safety. With the exception of the TEA algorithm, which
is described for illustrative purposes, the algorithms described here are among those
most widely used in applications where strong security is required. In some of them
there remain some minor weaknesses or areas of concern; space does not allow us to
describe all of those concerns here, and the reader is referred to Schneier [1996] for
further information. We summarize and compare the security and performance of the
algorithms in Section 11.5.1.
Readers who do not require an understanding of the operation of cryptographic
algorithms may omit Sections 11.3.1 and 11.3.2.
11.3.1 Secret-key (symmetric) algorithms
Many cryptographic algorithms have been developed and published in recent years.
Schneier [1996] describes more than 25 symmetric algorithms, many of which he
identifies as secure against known attacks. Here we have room to describe only three of
them. We have chosen the first, TEA, for the simplicity of its design and
implementation, and we use it to give a concrete illustration of the nature of such
algorithms. We go on to discuss the DES and IDEA algorithms in less detail. DES was


===== page 506 =====
488 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.7 TEA encryption function
void encrypt(unsigned long k[], unsigned long text[]) {
unsigned long y = text[0], z = text[1]; 1
unsigned long delta = 0x9e3779b9, sum = 0; int n; 2
for (n= 0; n < 32; n++) { 3
sum += delta; 4
y += ((z << 4) + k[0]) ^ (z+sum) ^ ((z >> 5) + k[1]); 5
z += ((y << 4) + k[2]) ^ (y+sum) ^ ((y >> 5) + k[3]); 6
}
text[0] = y; text[1] = z; 7
}
a US national standard for many years, but it is now largely of historical interest because
its 56-bit keys are too small to resist brute-force attack with modern hardware. IDEA
uses a 128-bit key. It is one of the most effective symmetric block encryption algorithms
and a good all-round choice for bulk encryption.
In 1997, the US National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) issued an
invitation for proposals for an algorithm to replace DES as a new US Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES). In October 2000 the winner was selected from 21
algorithms submitted by cryptographers from 11 countries. The winning Rijndael
algorithm was chosen for its combination of strength and efficiency. Further information
on it is given below.
TEA • The design principles for symmetric algorithms outlined above are illustrated
well in the Tiny Encryption Algorithm (TEA) developed at Cambridge University
[Wheeler and Needham 1994]. The encryption function, programmed in C, is given in
its entirety in Figure 11.7.
The TEA algorithm uses rounds of integer addition, XOR (the ^ operator) and
bitwise logical shifts (<< and >>) to achieve diffusion and confusion of the bit patterns
in the plaintext. The plaintext is a 64-bit block represented as two 32-bit integers in the
vectortext[]. The key is 128 bits long, represented as four 32-bit integers.
On each of the 32 rounds, the two halves of the text are repeatedly combined with
shifted portions of the key and each other in lines 5 and 6. The use of XOR and shifted
portions of the text provides confusion, and the shifting and swapping of the two
portions of the text provides diffusion. The non-repeating constant delta is combined
with each portion of the text on each cycle to obscure the key in case it might be revealed
by a section of text that does not vary. The decryption function is the inverse of that for
encryption and is given in Figure 11.8.
This short program provides secure and reasonably fast secret-key encryption. It
is somewhat faster than the DES algorithm, and the conciseness of the program lends
itself to optimization and hardware implementation. The 128-bit key is secure against
brute-force attacks. Studies by its authors and others have revealed only two very minor
weaknesses, which the authors addressed in a subsequent note [Wheeler and Needham
1997].


===== page 507 =====
SECTION 11.3 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS 489
Figure 11.8 TEA decryption function
void decrypt(unsigned long k[], unsigned long text[]) {
unsigned long y = text[0], z = text[1];
unsigned long delta = 0x9e3779b9, sum = delta << 5; int n;
for (n= 0; n < 32; n++) {
z -= ((y << 4) + k[2]) ^ (y + sum) ^ ((y >> 5) + k[3]);
y -= ((z << 4) + k[0]) ^ (z + sum) ^ ((z >> 5) + k[1]);
sum -= delta;
}
text[0] = y; text[1] = z;
}
To illustrate its use, Figure 11.9 shows a simple procedure that uses TEA to
encrypt and decrypt a pair of previously opened files (using the C stdio library).
DES • The Data Encryption Standard (DES) [National Bureau of Standards 1977] was
developed by IBM and subsequently adopted as a US national standard for government
and business applications. In this standard, the encryption function maps a 64-bit
plaintext input into a 64-bit encrypted output using a 56-bit key. The algorithm has 16
key-dependent stages known as rounds, in which the data to be encrypted is bit-rotated
by a number of bits determined by the key and three key-independent transpositions.
The algorithm was time-consuming to perform in software on the computers of the
1970s and 1980s, but it was implemented in fast VLSI hardware and can easily be
incorporated into network interface and other communication chips.
Figure 11.9 TEA in use
void tea(char mode, FILE *infile, FILE *outfile, unsigned long k[]) {
/* mode is 'e' for encrypt, 'd' for decrypt, k[] is the key.*/
char ch, Text[8]; int i;
while(!feof(infile)) {
i = fread(Text, 1, 8, infile); /* read 8 bytes from infile into Text */
if (i <= 0) break;
while (i < 8) { Text[i++] = ' ';} /* pad last block with spaces */
switch (mode) {
case 'e':
encrypt(k, (unsigned long*) Text); break;
case 'd':
decrypt(k, (unsigned long*) Text); break;
}
fwrite(Text, 1, 8, outfile); /* write 8 bytes from Text to outfile */
}
}


===== page 508 =====
490 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
In June 1997, it was successfully cracked in a widely publicized brute-force
attack. The attack was performed in the context of a competition to demonstrate the lack
of security of encryption with keys shorter than 128 bits [www.rsasecurity.com II]. A
consortium of Internet users ran a client application program on a their PCs and other
workstations, whose numbers reached 14,000 during one 24-hour period [Curtin and
Dolske 1998].
The client program was aimed at cracking the particular key used in a known
plaintext/ciphertext sample and then using it to decrypt a secret challenge message. The
clients interacted with a single server that coordinated their work, issuing each client
with ranges of key values to check and receiving progress reports from them. The typical
client computer ran the client program only as a background activity and had a
performance approximately equal to a 200 MHz Pentium processor. The key was
cracked in about 12 weeks, after approximately 25% of the possible 256 or 6 (cid:117) 1016
values had been checked. In 1998 a machine was developed by the Electronic Frontier
Foundation [EFF 1998] that can successfully crack DES keys in around three days.
Although it is still used in many commercial and other applications, DES in its
basic form should be considered obsolete for the protection of all but low-value
information. A solution that is frequently used is known as triple-DES (or 3DES)[ANSI
1985, Schneier 1996]. This involves applying DES three times with two keys, K 1 and K 2:
E (cid:11)K (cid:15)K (cid:15)M(cid:12) = E (cid:11)K (cid:15)D (cid:11)K (cid:15)E (cid:11)K (cid:15)M(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
3DES 1 2 DES 1 DES 2 DES 1
This gives a strength against brute-force attacks equivalent to a key length of 112 bits –
adequate for the foreseeable future – but it has the drawback of poor performance
resulting from the triple application of an algorithm that is already slow by modern
standards.
IDEA • The International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) was developed in the
early 1990s [Lai and Massey 1990, Lai 1992] as a successor to DES. Like TEA, it uses
a 128-bit key to encrypt 64-bit blocks. Its algorithm is based on the algebra of groups
and has eight rounds of XOR, addition modulo 216 and multiplication. For both DES and
IDEA, the same function is used for encryption and decryption: a useful property for
algorithms that are to be implemented in hardware.
The strength of IDEA has been extensively analyzed, and no significant
weaknesses have been found. It performs encryption and decryption at approximately
three times the speed of DES.
RC4 • RC4 is a stream cipher developed by Ronald Rivest [Rivest 1992b]. Keys can be
of any length up to 256 bytes. RC4 is easy to implement [Schneier 1996, pp. 397–8] and
performs encryption and decryption about 10 times as fast as DES. It was therefore
widely adopted in applications including IEEE 802.11 WiFi networks, but a weakness
was subsequently discovered by Fluhrer et al. [2001] that enabled attackers to crack
some keys. This led to a redesign of 802.11 security (see Section 11.6.4 for further
details).
AES • The Rijndael algorithm selected to become the Advanced Encryption Standard
algorithm by NIST was developed by Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen [Daemen and
Rijmen 2000, 2002]. The cipher has a variable block length and key length, with
specifications for keys with a length of 128, 192 or 256 bits to encrypt blocks with a


===== page 509 =====
SECTION 11.3 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS 491
length of 128, 192 or 256 bits. Both block length and key length can be extended by
multiples of 32 bits. The number of rounds in the algorithm varies from 9 to 13
depending on the key and block sizes. Rijndael can be implemented efficiently on a wide
range of processors and in hardware.
11.3.2 Public-key (asymmetric) algorithms
Only a few practical public-key schemes have been developed to date. They depend
upon the use of trap-door functions of large numbers to produce the keys. The keys Ke
and Kd are a pair of very large numbers, and the encryption function performs an
operation, such as exponentiation on M, using one of them. Decryption is a similar
function using the other key. If the exponentiation uses modular arithmetic, it can be
shown that the result is the same as the original value of M; that is:
D(K
d
, E(K
e
, M)) = M
A principal wishing to participate in secure communication with others makes a pair of
keys,Ke and Kd, and keeps the decryption key Kd a secret. The encryption key Ke can
be made known publicly for use by anyone who wants to communicate. The encryption
keyKe can be seen as a part of the one-way encryption function E, and the decryption
key Kd is the piece of secret knowledge that enables principal p to reverse the
encryption. Any holder of Ke (which is widely available) can encrypt messages {M}Ke ,
but only the principal who has the secret Kd can operate the trapdoor.
The use of functions of large numbers leads to large processing costs in computing
the functions E and D. We shall see later that this is a problem that has to be addressed
by the use of public keys only in the initial stages of secure communication sessions. The
RSA algorithm is certainly the most widely known public-key algorithm and we
describe it in some detail here. Another class of algorithms is based on functions derived
from the behaviour of elliptic curves in a plane. These algorithms offer the possibility of
less costly encryption and decryption functions with the same level of security, but their
practical application is less advanced and we deal with them only briefly.
RSA • The Rivest, Shamir and Adelman (RSA) design for a public-key cipher [Rivest
et al. 1978] is based on the use of the product of two very large prime numbers (greater
than 10100), relying on the fact that the determination of the prime factors of such large
numbers is so computationally difficult as to be effectively impossible.
Despite extensive investigations no flaws have been found in it, and it is now very
widely used. An outline of the method follows. To find a key pair <e,d>:
1. Choose two large prime numbers, P and Q (each greater than 10100), and form
N=P(cid:117)Q(cid:3)
Z=(P–1)(cid:117)(Q–1)
2. For d, choose any number that is relatively prime with Z (that is, such that d has
no common factors with Z).
We illustrate the computations involved using small integer values for P and Q:
P = 13, Q = 17 (cid:111)N = 221, Z = 192
d = 5


===== page 510 =====
492 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
3. To find e, solve the equation:(cid:3)
e(cid:117)d = 1 mod Z
That is, e(cid:117)d is the smallest element divisible by din the series Z+1, 2Z+1, 3Z+1, ....
e(cid:117)d = 1 mod 192 = 1, 193, 385, ...
385 is divisible by d
e = 385/5 = 77
To encrypt text using the RSA method, the plaintext is divided into equal blocks of
lengthk bits, where 2k<N (that is, such that the numerical value of a block is always
less than N; in practical applications, k is usually in the range 512 to 1024).
k = 7, since 27 = 128
The function for encrypting a single block of plaintext M is:
E'(e,N,M) = Me mod N
for a message M, the ciphertext is M77 mod 221
The function for decrypting a block of encrypted text cto produce the original plaintext
block is:
D'(d,N,c) = cd mod N
Rivest, Shamir and Adelman proved that E' and D' are mutual inverses (that is,
E'(D'(x))=D'(E'(x))=x) for all values of P in the range 0 (cid:148) P (cid:148) N.
The two parameters e,N can be regarded as a key for the encryption function, and
similarly the parameters d,N represent a key for the decryption function. So we can write
Ke=<e,N> and Kd=<d,N>, and we get the encryption functions E(Ke,M)={M}K (the
notation here indicating that the encrypted message can be decrypted only by the holder
of the private key Kd) and D(Kd, {M}K) = M.
It is worth noting one potential weakness of all public-key algorithms – because
the public key is available to attackers, they can easily generate encrypted messages.
Thus they can attempt to decrypt an unknown message by exhaustively encrypting
arbitrary bit sequences until a match with the target message is achieved. This attack,
which is known as a chosen plaintext attack, is defeated by ensuring that all messages
are longer than the key length, so that this form of brute-force attack is less feasible than
a direct attack on the key.
An intending recipient of secret information must publish or otherwise distribute
the pair <e,N> while keeping d secret. The publication of <e,N> does not compromise
the secrecy of d, because any attempt to determine d requires knowledge of the original
prime numbers P and Q, and these can only be obtained by the factorization of N.
Factoring of large numbers (we recall that P and Q were chosen to be > 10100, so N >
10200) is extremely time-consuming, even on very high-performance computers. In
1978, Rivest et al. concluded that factoring a number as large as 10200 would take more
than four billion years with the best known algorithm on a computer that performs one


===== page 511 =====
SECTION 11.4 DIGITAL SIGNATURES 493
million instructions per second. A similar calculation for today’s computers would
reduce this time to around a million years,
The RSA Corporation has issued a series of challenges to factor numbers of more
than 100 decimal digits [www.rsasecurity.com III]. At the time of writing, numbers of
up to 174 decimal digits (576 binary digits) have been successfully factored, so the use
of the RSA algorithm with 512-bit keys is clearly unacceptably weak for many purposes.
The RSA Corporation (holders of the patents in the RSA algorithm) recommends a key
length of at least 768 bits, or about 230 decimal digits, for long-term (~20 years)
security. Keys as large as 2048 bits are used in some applications.
The above strength calculations assume that the currently known factoring
algorithms are the best available. RSA and other forms of asymmetric cryptography that
use prime number multiplication as their one-way function will be vulnerable if a faster
factorization algorithm is discovered.
Elliptic curve algorithms • A method for generating public/private key pairs based on
the properties of elliptic curves has been developed and tested. Full details can be found
in the book by Menezes devoted to the subject [Menezes 1993]. The keys are derived
from a different branch of mathematics, and unlike RSA their security does not depend
upon the difficulty of factoring large numbers. Shorter keys are secure, and the
processing requirements for encryption and decryption are lower than those for RSA.
Elliptic curve encryption algorithms are likely to be adopted more widely in the future,
especially in systems such as those incorporating mobile devices, which have limited
processing resources. The relevant mathematics involves some quite complex properties
of elliptic curves and is beyond the scope of this book.
11.3.3 Hybrid cryptographic protocols
Public-key cryptography is convenient for electronic commerce because there is no need
for a secure key-distribution mechanism. (There is a need to authenticate public keys,
but this is much less onerous, requiring only a public-key certificate to be sent with the
key.) But the processing costs of public-key cryptography are too high for the encryption
of even the medium-sized messages normally encountered in electronic commerce. The
solution adopted in most large-scale distributed systems is to use a hybrid encryption
scheme in which public-key cryptography is used to authenticate the parties and to
encrypt an exchange of secret keys, which are used for all subsequent communication.
We describe the implementation of a hybrid protocol in the TLS case study in
Section11.6.3.
11.4 Digital signatures
Strong digital signatures are an essential requirement for secure systems. They are
needed in order to certify certain pieces of information – for example, to provide
trustworthy statements binding users’ identities to their public keys or binding some
access rights or roles to users’ identities.


===== page 512 =====
494 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
The need for signatures in many kinds of business and personal transaction is
beyond dispute. Handwritten signatures have been used as a means of verifying
documents for as long as documents have existed. Handwritten signatures are used to
meet the needs of document recipients to verify that the document is:
Authentic: It convinces the recipient that the signer deliberately signed the document
and it has not been altered by anyone else.
Unforgeable: It provides proof that the signer, and no one else, deliberately signed
the document. The signature cannot be copied and placed on another document.
Non-repudiable: The signer cannot credibly deny that the document was signed by
them.
In reality, none of these desirable properties of signing is entirely achieved by
conventional signatures – forgeries and copies are hard to detect, documents can be
altered after signing and signers are sometimes deceived into signing a document
involuntarily or unwittingly – but we are willing to live with their imperfection because
of the difficulty of cheating and the risk of detection. Like handwritten signatures,
digital signatures depend upon the binding of a unique and secret attribute of the signer
to a document. In the case of handwritten signatures, the secret is the handwriting pattern
of the signer.
The properties of digital documents held in stored files or messages are
completely different from those of paper documents. Digital documents are trivially
easy to generate, copy and alter. Simply appending the identity of the originator,
whether as a text string, a photograph or a handwritten image, has no value for
verification purposes.
What is needed is a means to irrevocably bind a signer’s identity to the entire
sequence of bits representing a document. This should meet the first requirement above,
for authenticity. As with handwritten signatures, though, the date of a document cannot
be guaranteed by a signature. The recipient of a signed document knows only that the
document was signed before they received it.
Regarding non-repudiation, there is a problem that does not arise with handwritten
signatures. What if the signer deliberately reveals their private key and subsequently
denies having signed, saying that there are others who could have done so, since the key
was not private? Some protocols have been developed to address this problem under the
heading of undeniable digital signatures [Schneier 1996], but they add considerably to
the complexity.
A document with a digital signature can be considerably more resistant to forgery
than a handwritten one. But the word ‘original’ has little meaning with reference to
digital documents. As we shall see in our discussion of the needs of electronic
commerce, digital signatures alone cannot, for example, prevent double-spending of
electronic cash – other measures are needed to prevent that. We now describe two
techniques for signing documents digitally, binding a principal’s identity to the
document. Both depend upon the use of cryptography.
Digital signing • An electronic document or message M can be signed by a principal A
by encrypting a copy of M with a key K A and attaching it to a plaintext copy of M and
A’s identifier. The signed document then consists of: M,A, [M]KA . The signature can be


===== page 513 =====
SECTION 11.4 DIGITAL SIGNATURES 495
Figure 11.10 Digital signatures with public keys
M signed doc
Signing H(M) h E(Kpri, h) {h}Kpri
128 bits M
{h}Kpri D(Kpub,{h}) h'
Verifying M
h = h'?
H(doc) h
verified by a principal that subsequently receives the document to check that it was
originated by A and that its contents, M, have not subsequently been altered.
If a secret key is used to encrypt the document, only principals that share the secret
can verify the signature. But if public-key cryptography is used, then the signer uses
their private key and anyone who has the corresponding public key can verify the
signature. This is a better analogue for conventional signatures and meets a wider range
of user needs. The verification of signatures proceeds differently depending on whether
secret-key or public-key cryptography is used to produce the signature. We describe the
two cases in Sections 11.4.1 and 11.4.2.
Digest functions • Digest functions are also called secure hash functions and denoted
H(M). They must be carefully designed to ensure that H(M) is different from H(M') for
all likely pairs of messages M and M'. If there are any pairs of different messages M and
M' such that H(M)= H(M'), then a duplicitous principal could send a signed copy of M,
but when confronted with it claim that M' was originally sent and that it must have been
altered in transit. We discuss some secure hash functions in Section 11.4.3.
11.4.1 Digital signatures with public keys
Public-key cryptography is particularly well adapted for the generation of digital
signatures because it is relatively simple and does not require any communication
between the recipient of a signed document and the signer or any third party.
The method for A to sign a message M and B to verify it is as follows (and is
illustrated graphically in Figure 11.10):
1. A generates a key pair Kpub and Kpriv and publishes the public key Kpub by
placing it in a well-known location.


===== page 514 =====
496 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
2. A computes the digest of M, H(M) using an agreed secure hash function H and
encrypts it using the private key Kpriv to produce the signature S={H(M)}Kpriv .
3. A sends the signed message [M]K = M,S to B.
4. B decrypts S using Kpub and computes the digest of M,H(M). If they match, the
signature is valid.
The RSA algorithm is quite suitable for use in constructing digital signatures. Note that
theprivate key of the signer is used to encrypt the signature, in contrast to the use of the
recipient’spublic key for encryption when the aim is to transmit information in secrecy.
The explanation for this difference is straightforward – a signature must be created using
a secret known only to the signer and it should be accessible to all for verification.
11.4.2 Digital signatures with secret keys – MACs
There is no technical reason why a secret-key encryption algorithm should not be used
to encrypt a digital signature, but in order to verify such signatures the key must be
disclosed, and this causes some problems:
(cid:129) The signer must arrange for the verifier to receive the secret key used for signing
securely.
(cid:129) It may be necessary to verify a signature in several contexts and at different times
– at the time of signing, the signer may not know the identities of the verifiers. To
resolve this, verification could be delegated to a trusted third party who holds
secret keys for all signers, but this adds complexity to the security model and
requires secure communication with the trusted third party.
(cid:129) The disclosure of a secret key used for signing is undesirable because it weakens
the security of signatures made with that key – a signature could be forged by a
holder of the key who is not the owner of it.
For all these reasons, the public-key method for generating and verifying signatures
offers the most convenient solution in most situations.
An exception arises when a secure channel is used to transmit unencrypted
messages but there is a need to verify the authenticity of the messages. Since a secure
channel provides secure communication between a pair of processes, a shared secret key
can be established using the hybrid method outlined in Section 11.3.3 and used to
produce low-cost signatures. These signatures are called message authentication codes
(MACs) to reflect their more limited purpose – they authenticate communication
between pairs of principals based on a shared secret.
A low-cost signing technique based on shared secret keys that has adequate
security for many purposes is illustrated in Figure 11.11 and outlined below. The
method depends upon the existence of a secure channel through which the shared key
can be distributed:
1. A generates a random key K for signing and distributes it using secure channels to
one or more principals who will need to authenticate messages received from A.
The principals are trusted not to disclose the shared key.


===== page 515 =====
SECTION 11.4 DIGITAL SIGNATURES 497
Figure 11.11 Low-cost signatures with a shared secret key
M signed doc
H(M+K) h
Signing
M
K
M
h
Verifying
h = h'?
H(M+K) h'
K
2. For any document M that A wishes to sign, A concatenates M with K, computes
the digest of the result, h = H(cid:11)M+K(cid:12), and sends the signed document
(cid:62)M(cid:64) = M(cid:15)h to anyone wishing to verify the signature. (The digest h is a MAC.)
K
K will not be compromised by the disclosure of h, since the hash function has
totally obscured its value.
3. The receiver, B, concatenates the secret key K with the received document M and
computes the digest h' = H(cid:11)M+K(cid:12). The signature is verified if h = h'.
Although this method suffers from the disadvantages listed above, it has a performance
advantage because it involves no encryption. (Secure hashing is typically about 3–10
times faster than symmetric encryption; see Section 11.5.1.) The TLS secure channel
protocol described in Section 11.6.3 supports the use of a wide variety of MACs,
including the scheme described here. The method is also used in the Millicent electronic
cash protocol described at www.cdk5.net/security, where it is important to keep the
processing cost low for low-value transactions.
11.4.3 Secure digest functions
There are many ways to produce a fixed-length bit pattern that characterizes an
arbitrary-length message or document. Perhaps the simplest is to use the XOR operation
iteratively to combine fixed-length pieces of the source document. Such a function is
often used in communication protocols to produce a short fixed-length hash to
characterize a message for error-detection purposes, but it is inadequate as the basis for


===== page 516 =====
498 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
a digital signature scheme. A secure digest function h = H(M) should have the following
properties:
1. Given M, it is easy to compute h.
2. Given h, it is hard to compute M.
3. Given M, it is hard to find another message M', such that H(M)= H(M').
Such functions are also called one-way hash functions. The reason for this name is self-
evident based on the first two properties. Property 3 demands an additional feature: even
though we know that the result of a hash function cannot be unique (because the digest
is an information-reducing transformation), we need to be sure that an attacker, given a
message M that produces a hash h, cannot discover another message M' that also
produces h. If an attacker could do this, then they could forge a signed document M'
without knowledge of the signing key by copying the signature from the signed
document M and appending it to M'.
Admittedly, the set of messages that hash to the same value is restricted and the
attacker would have difficulty in producing a meaningful forgery, but with patience it
could be done, so it must be guarded against. The feasibility of doing so is considerably
enhanced in the case of a so-called birthday attack:
1. Alice prepares two versions, M and M', of a contract for Bob. M is favourable to
Bob and M' is not.
2. Alice makes several subtly different versions of both M and M' that are visually
indistinguishable from each other by methods such as adding spaces at the ends of
lines. She compares the hashes of all the Ms with all the M's. If she finds two that
are the same, she can proceed to the next step; if not, she goes on producing
visually indistinguishable versions of the two documents until she gets a match.
3. When she has a pair of documents M and M' that hash to the same value, she gives
the favourable document M to Bob for him to sign with a digital signature using
his private key. When he returns it, she substitutes the matching unfavourable
version M', retaining the signature from M.
If our hash values are 64 bits long, we require only 232 versions of M and M' on average.
This is too small for comfort. We need to make our hash values at least 128 bits long to
guard against this type of attack.
The attack relies on a statistical paradox known as the birthday paradox – the
probability of finding a matching pair in a given set is far greater than that for finding a
match for a given individual. Stallings [2005] gives the statistical derivation for the
probability that there will be two people with the same birthday in a set of n people. The
result is that for a set of only 23 people the chances are even, whereas we require a set
of 253 people for an even chance that there will be one with a birthday on a given day.
To satisfy the properties listed above, a secure digest function needs to be
carefully designed. The bit-level operations used and their sequencing are similar to
those found in symmetric cryptography, but in this case the operations need not be
information-preserving, since the function is definitely not intended to be reversible. So
a secure digest function can make use of the full range of arithmetic and bit-wise logical
operations. The length of the source text is usually included in the digested data.


===== page 517 =====
SECTION 11.4 DIGITAL SIGNATURES 499
Figure 11.12 X509 Certificate format
Subject Distinguished Name, Public Key
Issuer Distinguished Name, Signature
Period of validity Not Before Date, Not After Date
Administrative information Version, Serial Number
Extended information
Two widely used digest functions for practical applications are the MD5
algorithm (so called because it is the fifth in a sequence of message digest algorithms
developed by Ron Rivest) and SHA-1 (the Secure Hash Algorithm), which has been
adopted for standardization by the US National Institute for Standards and Technology
(NIST). Both have been carefully tested and analyzed and can be considered adequately
secure for the foreseeable future, while their implementations are reasonably efficient.
We describe them briefly here. Schneier [1996] and Mitchell et al. [1992] survey digital
signature techniques and message digest functions in depth.
MD5 • The MD5 algorithm [Rivest 1992a] uses four rounds, each applying one of four
nonlinear functions to each of 16 32-bit segments of a 512-bit block of source text. The
result is a 128-bit digest. MD5 is one of the most efficient algorithms currently available.
SHA-1 • SHA-1 [NIST 2002] is an algorithm that produces a 160-bit digest. It is based
on Rivest’s MD4 algorithm (which is similar to MD5), with some additional operations.
It is substantially slower than MD5, but the 160-bit digest does offer greater security
against brute-force and birthday-style attacks. SHA algorithms that deliver longer
digests (224, 256 and 512 bits) are also included in the standard [NIST 2002]. Of course,
their additional length implies additional costs for the generation, storage and
communication of digital signatures and MACs, but following the publication of attacks
on SHA-1’s predecessors, which suggest that SHA-1 is vulnerable [Randall and Szydlo
2004], NIST announced that is to be superseded by the longer SHA digest versions in
US government software by 2010 [NIST 2004].
Using an encryption algorithm to make a digest • It is possible to use a symmetric
encryption algorithm such as those detailed in Section 11.3.1 to produce a secure digest.
In this case, the key should be published so that the digest algorithm can be applied by
anyone wishing to verify a digital signature. The encryption algorithm is used in CBC
mode, and the digest is the result of combining the penultimate CBC value with the final
encrypted block.
11.4.4 Certificate standards and certificate authorities
X.509 is the most widely used standard format for certificates [CCITT 1988b]. Although
the X.509 certificate format is a part of the X.500 standard for the construction of global
directories of names and attributes [CCITT 1988a], it is commonly used in
cryptographic work as a format definition for freestanding certificates. We describe the
X.500 naming standard in Chapter 13.


===== page 518 =====
500 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
The structure and content of an X.509 certificate are illustrated in Figure 11.12.
As can be seen, it binds a public key to a named entity called a subject. The binding is
in the signature, which is issued by another named entity called the issuer. The
certificate has a period of validity, which is defined by a pair of dates. The
<Distinguished Name> entries are intended to be the name of a person, organization or
other entity together with sufficient contextual information to render it unique. In a full
X.500 implementation this contextual information would be drawn from a directory
hierarchy in which the named entity appears, but in the absence of global X.500
implementations it can only be a descriptive string.
This format is included in the TLS protocol for electronic commerce and is widely
used in practice to authenticate the public keys of services and their clients. Certain well-
known companies and organizations have established themselves to act as certificate
authorities (for example, Verisign [www.verisign.com] and CREN [www.cren.net]),
and other companies and individuals can obtain X.509 public-key certificates from them
by submitting satisfactory evidence of their identity. This leads to a two-step verification
procedure for any X.509 certificate:
1. Obtain the public-key certificate of the issuer (a certification authority) from a
reliable source.
2. Validate the signature.
The SPKI approach • The X.509 approach is based on the global uniqueness of
distinguished names. It has been pointed out that this is an impractical goal that does not
reflect the reality of current legal and commercial practice [Ellison 1996], in which the
identities of individuals are not assumed to be unique but are made unique by reference
to other people and organizations. This can be seen in the use of a driving licence or a
letter from a bank to authenticate an individual’s name and address (a name alone is
unlikely to be unique among the world’s population). This leads to longer verification
chains, because there are many possible issuers of public-key certificates, and their
signatures must be validated through a chain of verification that leads back to someone
known and trusted by the principal performing the verification. But the resulting
verification is likely to be more convincing, and many of the steps in such a chain can
be cached to shorten the process on future occasions.
The arguments above are the basis for the recently developed Simple Public-Key
Infrastructure (SPKI) proposals (see RFC 2693 [Ellison et al. 1999]). This is a scheme
for the creation and management of sets of public certificates. It enables chains of
certificates to be processed using logical inference to produce derived certificates. For
example, ‘Bob believes that Alice’s public key is K Apub’ and ‘Carol trusts Bob on
Alice’s keys’ implies ‘Carol believes that Alice’s public key is K Apub’.
11.5 Cryptography pragmatics
In Section 11.5.1, we compare the performance of the encryption and secure hash
algorithms described or mentioned above. We consider encryption algorithms alongside
secure hash functions because encryption can also be used as a method for digital
signing.


===== page 519 =====
SECTION 11.5 CRYPTOGRAPHY PRAGMATICS 501
Figure 11.13 Performance of symmetric encryption and secure digest algorithms
Key size/hash size PRB optimized Crypto++
(bits) 90 MHz Pentium 1 2.1 GHz Pentium 4
(Mbytes/s) (Mbytes/s)
TEA 128 – 23.801
DES 56 2.113 21.340
Triple-DES 112 0.775 9.848
IDEA 128 1.219 18.963
AES 128 – 61.010
AES 192 – 53.145
AES 256 – 48.229
MD5 128 17.025 216.674
SHA-1 160 – 67.977
In Section 11.5.2, we discuss some non-technical issues surrounding the use of
cryptography. There is not space to do justice tothe vast amount of political discussion
that has taken place on this subject since strong cryptographic algorithms first appeared
in the public domain, nor have the debates yet reached many definitive conclusions. Our
aim is merely to give the reader some awareness of this ongoing debate.
11.5.1 Performance of cryptographic algorithms
Figure 11.13 compares the speeds of the symmetric encryption algorithms and secure
digest functions that we have discussed in this chapter. Where available, we give two
speed measurements. In the column labelled PRB optimized we give figures based on
those published by Preneel et al. [1998]. The figures in the column labelled Crypto++
were obtained much more recently by the authors of the Crypto++ open source library
of cryptographic schemes [www.cryptopp.com]. The column headings indicate the
speed of the hardware used for these benchmarks. The PRB implementations were hand-
optimized assembler programs whereas the Crypto++ ones were C++ programs
generated with an optimizing compiler.
The key lengths give an indication of computational cost of a brute-force attack
on the key; the true strength of cryptographic algorithms is much more difficult to
evaluate and rests on reasoning about the success of the algorithm in obscuring the plain
text. Preneel et al. provide a useful discussion on the strength and performance of the
main symmetric algorithms.
What do these performance figures signify for real applications of cryptography,
such as their use in the TLS scheme for secure web interactions (the https protocol,
described in Section 11.6.3)? Web pages are seldom larger than 100 kilobytes, so the
contents of a page can be encrypted using any of the symmetric algorithms in a few
milliseconds, even with a processor that is quite slow by today’s standards. RSA is used
primarily for digital signatures, and that step can also be performed in a few
milliseconds. Thus the impact of algorithm performance on the perceived speed of the
https application is minimal.


===== page 520 =====
502 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Asymmetric algorithms such as RSA are seldom used for data encryption, but
their performance for signing is of interest. The Crypto++ library pages indicate that
with the hardware mentioned in the last column of Figure 11.13 it takes about 4.75 ms
using RSA with a 1024-bit key to sign a secure hash (presumably using 160-bit SHA-1)
and about 0.18 ms to verify the signature.
11.5.2 Applications of cryptography and political obstacles
The algorithms described above all emerged during the 1980s and 1990s, when
computer networks were beginning to be used for commercial purposes and it was
becoming evident that their lack of security was a major problem. As we mentioned in
the introduction to this chapter, the emergence of cryptographic software was strongly
resisted by the US government. The resistance had two sources: the US National
Security Agency (NSA), which was thought to have a policy to restrict the strength of
cryptography available to other nations to a level at which the NSA could decrypt any
secret communication for military intelligence purposes; and the US Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) which aimed to ensure that its agents could have privileged access
to the cryptographic keys used by all private organizations and individuals in the US for
law-enforcement purposes.
Cryptographic software was classified as a munition in the United States and was
subject to stringent export restrictions. Other countries, especially allies of the US,
applied similar (or in some cases even more stringent) restrictions. The problem was
compounded by the general ignorance among politicians and the general public as to
what cryptographic software was and its potential non-military applications. US
software companies protested that the restrictions were inhibiting the export of software
such as browsers, and the export restrictions were eventually formulated in a form that
allowed the export of code using keys of no more than 40 bits – hardly strong
cryptography!
The export restrictions may have hindered the growth of electronic commerce, but
they were not particularly effective in preventing the spread of cryptographic expertise
or in keeping cryptographic software out of the hands of users in other countries, since
many programmers inside and outside the US were eager and able to implement and
distribute cryptographic code. The current position is that software that implements
most of the major cryptographic algorithms has been available world-wide for several
years, in print [Schneier 1996] and online, in commercial and freeware versions
[www.rsasecurity.com I,cryptography.org,privacy.nb.ca,www.openssl.org].
An example is the program called PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) [Garfinkel 1994,
Zimmermann 1995], originally developed by Philip Zimmermann and carried forward
by him and others. This is part of a technical and political campaign to ensure that the
availability of cryptographic methods is not controlled by the US government. PGP has
been developed and distributed with the aim of enabling all computer users to enjoy the
level of privacy and integrity afforded by the use of public-key cryptography in their
communications. PGP generates and manages public and secret keys on behalf of a user.
It uses RSA public-key encryption for authentication and to transmit secret keys to the
intended communication partner, and it uses the IDEA or 3DES secret-key encryption
algorithms to encrypt mail messages and other documents. (At the time PGP was first
developed, use of the DES algorithm was controlled by the US government.) PGP is


===== page 521 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 503
widely available in both free and commercial versions. It is distributed via separate
distribution sites for North American users [www.pgp.com] and those in other parts of
the world [International PGP] to circumvent (perfectly legally) the US export
regulations.
The US government eventually recognized the futility of the NSA’s position and
the harm that it was causing to the US computer industry (which was unable to market
secure versions of web browsers, distributed operating systems and many other products
world-wide). In January 2000 the US government introduced a new policy
[www.bxa.doc.gov] intended to allow US software vendors to export software that
incorporates strong encryption. But a legal bar was retained on delivery to certain
countries and end-users, see www.rsa.com for further information. Of course, the US
does not have a monopoly on the production or the publication of cryptographic
software; open source implementations are available for all the well-known algorithms
[www.cryptopp.com]. The effect of the regulations is simply to hamper the marketing
of some US-produced commercial software products.
Other political initiatives have aimed to maintain control over the use of
cryptography by introducing legislation insisting on the inclusion of loopholes or trap
doors available only to government law-enforcement and security agencies. Such
proposals spring from the perception that secret communication channels can be very
useful to criminals of all sorts. Before the advent of digital cryptography, governments
always had the means to intercept and analyze communications between members of the
public. Strong digital cryptography radically alters that situation. But these proposals to
legislate to prevent the use of strong, uncompromized cryptography have been strongly
resisted by citizens and civil liberties bodies, who are concerned about their impact on
citizens’ privacy rights. So far, none of these legislative proposals has been adopted, but
political efforts are continuing and the eventual introduction of a legal framework for
the use of cryptography may be inevitable.
11.6 Case studies: Needham–Schroeder, Kerberos, TLS, 802.11 WiFi
The authentication protocols originally published by Needham and Schroeder [1978] are
at the heart of many security techniques. We present them in detail in Section 11.6.1.
One of the most important applications of their secret-key authentication protocol is the
Kerberos system [Neuman and Ts’o 1994], which is the subject of our second case study
(Section 11.6.2). Kerberos was designed to provide authentication between clients and
servers in networks that form a single management domain (intranets).
Our third case study (Section 11.6.3) deals with the Transport Layer Security
(TLS) protocol. This was designed specifically to meet the need for secure electronic
transactions. It is now supported by most web browsers and servers and is employed in
most of the commercial transactions that take place via the Web.
Our final case study (Section 11.6.4) illustrates the difficulty of engineering
secure systems. The IEEE 802.11 WiFi standard was published in 1999 with a security
specification included. But subsequent analysis and attacks have shown the
specification to be severely inadequate. We identify the weaknesses and relate them to
the cryptographic principles covered in this chapter.


===== page 522 =====
504 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
11.6.1 The Needham–Schroeder authentication protocol
The protocols described here were developed in response to the need for a secure means
to manage keys (and passwords) in a network. At the time the work was published
[Needham and Schroeder 1978], network file services were just emerging and there was
an urgent need for better ways to manage security in local networks.
In networks that are integrated for management purposes, this need can be met by
a secure key service that issues session keys in the form of challenges (see Section
11.2.2). That is the purpose of the secret-key protocol developed by Needham and
Schroeder. In the same paper, Needham and Schroeder also set out a protocol based on
the use of public keys for authentication and key distribution that does not depend upon
the existence of secure key servers and is hence more suitable for use in networks with
many independent management domains, such as the Internet. We do not describe the
public-key version here, but the TLS protocol described in Section 11.6.3 is a variation
of it.
Needham and Schroeder proposed a solution to authentication and key
distribution based on an authentication server that supplies secret keys to clients. The
job of the authentication server is to provide a secure way for pairs of processes to obtain
shared keys. To do this, it must communicate with its clients using encrypted messages.
NeedhamandSchroederwithsecretkeys • In their model, a process acting on behalf of
a principal A that wishes to initiate secure communication with another process acting
on behalf of a principal B can obtain a key for this purpose. The protocol is described
for two arbitrary processes A and B, but in client-server systems, A is likely to be a client
initiating a sequence of requests to some server B. The key is supplied to A in two forms:
one that A can use to encrypt the messages that it sends to B and one that it can transmit
securely to B. (The latter is encrypted in a key that is known to B but not to A, so that B
can decrypt it and the key is not compromised during transmission.)
The authentication server S maintains a table containing a name and a secret key
for each principal known to the system. The secret key is used only to authenticate client
processes to the authentication server and to transmit messages securely between client
processes and the authentication server. It is never disclosed to third parties and it is
transmitted across the network at most once, when it is generated. (Ideally, a key should
always be transmitted by some other means, such as on paper or in a verbal message,
avoiding any exposure on the network.) A secret key is the equivalent of the password
used to authenticate users in centralized systems. For human principals, the name held
by the authentication service is their username and the secret key is their password. Both
are supplied by the user on request to client processes acting on the user’s behalf.
The protocol is based on the generation and transmission of tickets by the
authentication server. A ticket is an encrypted message containing a secret key for use
in communication between A and B. We tabulate the messages in the Needham and
Schroeder secret-key protocol in Figure 11.14. The authentication server is S.
N A and N B are nonces. A nonce is an integer value that is added to a message to
demonstrate its freshness. Nonces are used only once and are generated on demand. For
example, the nonces may be generated as a sequence of integer values or by reading the
clock at the sending machine.
If the protocol is successfully completed, both A and B can be sure that any
message encrypted in K AB that they receive comes from the other, and that any message


===== page 523 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 505
Figure 11.14 The Needham–Schroeder secret-key authentication protocol
Header Message Notes
1. A (cid:111) S: A, B, N A A requests S to supply a key for communication
with B.
2. S (cid:111) A: {N A, B, K AB ,(cid:3) S returns a message encrypted in A’s secret key,
{K AB , A}KB }KA containing a newly generated key K AB, and a
‘ticket’ encrypted in B’s secret key. The nonce N A
demonstrates that the message was sent in response
to the preceding one. A believes that S sent the
message because only S knows A’s secret key.
3. A (cid:111) B: {K AB , A}KB A sends the ticket to B.
4. B (cid:111) A: {N B}KAB B decrypts the ticket and uses the new key, K AB, to
encrypt another nonce, N B.
5. A (cid:111) B: {N B – 1}KAB A demonstrates to B that it was the sender of the
previous message by returning an agreed
transformation of N B.
encrypted in K AB that they send can be understood only by the other or by S (and S is
assumed to be trustworthy). This is so because the only messages that have been sent
containing K AB were encrypted in A’s secret key or B’s secret key.
There is a weakness in this protocol in that B has no reason to believe that message
3 is fresh. An intruder who manages to obtain the key K AB and make a copy of the ticket
and authenticator {K AB , A} KB (both of which might have been left in an exposed storage
location by a careless or a failed client program running under A’s authority) can use
them to initiate a subsequent exchange with B, impersonating A. For this attack to occur
an old value of K AB has to be compromised; in today’s terminology, Needham and
Schroeder did not include this possibility on their threat list, and the consensus of
opinion is that one should do so. The weakness can be remedied by adding a nonce or
timestamp to message 3, so that it becomes: {K AB , A,t}KBpub . B decrypts this message
and checks that t is recent. This is the solution adopted in Kerberos.
11.6.2 Kerberos
Kerberos was developed at MIT in the 1980s [Steiner et al. 1988] to provide a range of
authentication and security facilities for use in the campus computing network at MIT
and other intranets. It has undergone several revisions and enhancements in the light of
experience and feedback from user organizations. Kerberos version 5 [Neuman and Ts’o
1994], which we describe here, is an Internet standard (see RFC 4120 [Neuman et al.
2005]) and is used by many companies and organizations. Source code for an
implementation of Kerberos is available from MIT [web.mit.eduI]; it is included in the
OSF Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) [OSF 1997] and as the default
authentication service in Microsoft Windows [www.microsoft.com II]. An extension


===== page 524 =====
506 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.15 System architecture of Kerberos
Kerberos Key Distribution Centre
Authentication
Step A database
Authen- Ticket-
1. Request for tication granting
TGS ticket service A service T
2. TGS
ticket
Step B
3. Request for
server ticket
Login 4. Server ticket Step C
session setup 5. Service
Server request
Client session setup Service Server
C Request encrypted with session key function S
DoOperation
• Reply encrypted with session key
•
•
was included to incorporate the use of public-key certificates for the initial
authentication of principals (Step A in Figure 11.15) [Neuman et al. 1999].
Figure 11.15 shows the process architecture. Kerberos deals with three kinds of
security object:
Ticket: A token issued to a client by the Kerberos ticket-granting service for
presentation to a particular server, verifying that the sender has recently been
authenticated by Kerberos. Tickets include an expiry time and a newly generated
session key for use by the client and the server.
Authenticator: A token constructed by a client and sent to a server to prove the
identity of the user and the currency of any communication with a server. An
authenticator can be used only once. It contains the client’s name and a timestamp
and is encrypted in the appropriate session key.
Session key: A secret key randomly generated by Kerberos and issued to a client for
use when communicating with a particular server. Encryption is not mandatory for
all communication with servers; the session key is used for encrypting
communication with those servers that demand it and for encrypting all
authenticators (see above).
Client processes must possess a ticket and a session key for each server that they use. It
wouldbe impractical to supply a new ticket and key for each client-server interaction,
so most tickets are granted to clients with a lifetime of several hours so that they can be
used for interaction with a particular server until they expire.
A Kerberos server is known as a Key Distribution Centre (KDC). Each KDC
offers an Authentication Service (AS) and a Ticket-Granting Service (TGS). On login,


===== page 525 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 507
users are authenticated by the AS, using a network-secure variation of the password
method, and the client process acting on behalf of the user is supplied with a ticket-
granting ticket and a session key for communicating with the TGS. Subsequently, the
original client process and its descendants can use the ticket-granting ticket to obtain
tickets and session keys for specific services from the TGS.
The Needham and Schroeder [1978] protocol is followed quite closely in
Kerberos, with time values (integers representing a date and time) used as nonces. This
serves two purposes:
(cid:129) to guard against replay of old messages intercepted in the network or the reuse of
old tickets found lying in the memory of machines from which the authorized user
has logged out (nonces were used to achieve this purpose in Needham and
Schroeder);
(cid:129) to apply a lifetime to tickets, enabling the system to revoke users’ rights when, for
example, they cease to be authorized users of the system.
Below we describe the Kerberos protocols in detail, using the notation defined at the
bottom of the page. First, we describe the protocol by which the client obtains a ticket
and a session key for access to the TGS.
A Kerberos ticket has a fixed period of validity starting at time t and ending at
1
time t . A ticket for a client C to access a server S takes the form:
2
(cid:94)C(cid:15)S(cid:15)t (cid:15)t (cid:15)K (cid:96) , which we denote as (cid:94)ticket(cid:11)C(cid:15)S(cid:12)(cid:96)
1 2 CS K S K S
The client’s name is included in the ticket to avoid possible use by impostors, as we shall
see later. The step and message numbers in Figure 11.15 correspond to those in tabulated
description A. Note that message 1 is not encrypted and does not include C’s password.
It contains a nonce that is used to check the validity of the reply.
A. Obtain Kerberos session key and TGS ticket, once per login session
Header Message Notes
1. C (cid:111) A:(cid:3) C, T, n Client C requests the Kerberos
Request for authentication server A to supply a
TGS ticket ticket for communication with the
ticket-granting service T.
2. A (cid:111) C: (cid:3) {K , n} ,{ticket(C,T)} A returns a message containing a
CT KC KT
TGS session ticket encrypted in its secret key
containing
key and C, T, t , t , K and a session key for C to use with
1 2 CT
ticket T. The inclusion of the nonce n
encrypted in K shows that the
C
message comes from the recipient
of message 1, who must know K .
C
Notation:
A Name of Kerberos authentication service. n A nonce.
T Name of Kerberos ticket-granting service. t A timestamp.
C Name of client. t1 Starting time for validity of ticket.
t2 Ending time for validity of ticket.


===== page 526 =====
508 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Message 2 is sometimes called a ‘challenge’ because it presents the requester with
information that is only useful if it knows C’s secret key, K . An impostor who attempts
C
to impersonate C by sending message 1 can get no further, since they cannot decrypt
message 2. For principals that are users, K is a scrambled version of the user’s
C
password. The client process will prompt the user to type their password and will
attempt to decrypt message 2 with it. If the user gives the right password, the client
process obtains the session key K and a valid ticket for the ticket-granting service; if
CT
not, it obtains gibberish. Servers have secret keys of their own, known only to the
relevant server process and to the authentication server.
When a valid ticket has been obtained from the authentication service, the client
C can use it to communicate with the ticket-granting service to obtain tickets for other
servers any number of times until the ticket expires. Thus to obtain a ticket for any server
S, C constructs an authenticator encrypted in K of the form:
CT
{C, t} , which we denote as {auth(C)} , and sends a request to T:
KCT KCT
B. Obtain ticket for a server S, once per client-server session
3. C (cid:111) T:(cid:3) {auth(C)} ,(cid:3) C requests the ticket-granting
KCT
Request serverT to supply a ticket for
{ticket(C,T)} , S, n
ticket for KT communication with another
service S server, S.
4. T (cid:111) C:(cid:3) {KCS, n}
KCT
,{ticket(C,S)}
KS
T checks the ticket. If it is valid T
Service generates a new random session
ticket key, KCS,and returns it with a
ticket for S (encrypted in the
server’s secret key, KS).
C is then ready to issue request messages to the server, S:
C. Issue a server request with a ticket
5. C (cid:111) S:(cid:3) {auth(C)} ,{ticket(C,S)} ,(cid:3) C sends the ticket to S with a
KCS KS
Service newly generated authenticator for
request, n
request C and a request. The request
would be encrypted in K if
CS
secrecy of the data is required.
For the client to be sure of the server’s authenticity, S should return the nonce n to C (to
reduce the number of messages required, this could be included in the messages that
contain the server’s reply to the request):
D. Authenticate server (optional)
6. S (cid:111) C:(cid:3) {n} (Optional): S sends the nonce to C,
KCS
Server auth-(cid:3) encrypted in K
CS
.
entication


===== page 527 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 509
ApplicationofKerberos • Kerberos was developed for use in Project Athena at MIT – a
campus-wide networked computing facility for undergraduate education with many
workstations and servers providing a service to more than 5000 users. The environment
is such that neither the trustworthiness of clients nor the security of the network and the
machines that offer network services can be assumed – for example, workstations are
not protected against the installation of user-developed system software, and server
machines (other than the Kerberos server) are not necessarily secured against physical
interference with their software configuration.
Kerberos provides virtually all of the security in the Athena system. It is used to
authenticate users and other principals. Most of the servers running on the network have
been extended to require a ticket from each client at the start of every client-server
interaction. These include file storage (NFS and Andrew File System), electronic mail,
remote login and printing. Users’ passwords are known only to the user and to the
Kerberos authentication service. Services have secret keys that are known only to
Kerberos and the servers that provide the service.
We describe here the way in which Kerberos is applied to the authentication of
users on login. Its use to secure the NFS file service is described in Chapter 12.
LoginwithKerberos • When a user logs into a workstation, the login program sends the
user’s name to the Kerberos authentication service. If the user is known to the
authentication service, it replies with a session key, a nonce encrypted in the user’s
password and a ticket for the TGS. The login program then attempts to decrypt the
session key and the nonce using the password that the user typed in response to the
password prompt. If the password is correct, the login program obtains the session key
and the nonce. It checks the nonce and stores the session key with the ticket for
subsequent use when communicating with the TGS. At this point, the login program can
erase the user’s password from its memory, since the ticket now serves to authenticate
the user. A login session is then started for the user on the workstation. Note that the
user’s password is never exposed to eavesdropping on the network – it is retained in the
workstation and is erased from memory soon after it is entered.
AccessingserverswithKerberos • Whenever a program running on a workstation needs
to access a new service, it requests a ticket for the service from the ticket-granting serv-
ice. For example, when a UNIX user wishes to log into a remote computer, the rlogin
command program on the user’s workstation obtains a ticket from the Kerberos ticket-
granting service for access to the rlogind network service. The rlogin command program
sends the ticket, together with a new authenticator, in a request to the rlogind process on
the computer where the user wishes to log in. The rlogind program decrypts the ticket
with the rlogin service’s secret key and checks the validity of the ticket (that is, that the
ticket’s lifetime has not expired). Server machines must take care to store their secret
keys in storage that is inaccessible to intruders.
Therlogind program then uses the session key included in the ticket to decrypt the
authenticator and checks that the authenticator is fresh (authenticators can be used only
once). Once the rlogind program is satisfied that the ticket and authenticator are valid,
there is no need for it to check the user’s name and password, because the user’s identity
is known to the rlogind program and a login session is established for that user on the
remote machine.


===== page 528 =====
510 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
ImplementationofKerberos • Kerberos is implemented as a server that runs on a secure
machine. A set of libraries is provided for use by client applications and services. The
DES encryption algorithm is used, but this is implemented as a separate module that can
be easily replaced.
The Kerberos service is scalable – the world is divided into separate domains of
authentication authority, called realms, each with its own Kerberos server. Most
principals are registered in just one realm, but the Kerberos ticket-granting servers are
registered in all of the realms. Principals can authenticate themselves to servers in other
realms through their local ticket-granting server.
Within a single realm, there can be several authentication servers, all of which
have copies of the same authentication database. The authentication database is
replicated by a simple master–slave technique. Updates are applied to the master copy
by a single Kerberos Database Management service (KDBM) that runs only on the
master machine. The KDBM handles requests from users to change their passwords and
requests from system administrators to add or delete principals and to change their
passwords.
To make this scheme transparent to users, the lifetime of TGS tickets ought to be
as long as the longest possible login session, since the use of an expired ticket will result
in the rejection of service requests; the only remedy is for the user to reauthenticate the
login session and then request new server tickets for all of the services in use. In practice,
ticket lifetimes in the region of 12 hours are used.
CritiquesofKerberos • The protocol for Kerberos version 5 described above contains
several improvements designed to deal with criticisms of earlier versions [Bellovin and
Merritt 1990, Burrows et al. 1990]. The most important criticism of version 4 was that
the nonces used in authenticators were implemented as timestamps, and protection
against the replay of authenticators depended upon at least loose synchronization of
clients’ and servers’ clocks. Furthermore, if a synchronization protocol is used to bring
client and server clocks into loose synchrony, the synchronization protocol must itself
be secure against security attacks. See Chapter 14 for information on clock
synchronization protocols.
The protocol definition for version 5 allows the nonces in authenticators to be
implemented as timestamps or as sequence numbers. In both cases, it requires that they
be unique and that servers hold a list of recently received nonces from each client to
check that they are not replayed. This is an inconvenient implementation requirement
and is difficult for servers to guarantee in case of failures. Kehne et al. [1992] have
published a proposed improvement to the Kerberos protocol that does not rely on
synchronized clocks.
The security of Kerberos depends on limited session lifetimes. The period of
validity of TGS tickets is generally limited to a few hours; the period must be chosen to
be long enough to avoid inconvenient interruptions of service but short enough to ensure
that users who have been deregistered or downgraded do not continue to use the
resources for more than a short period. This might cause difficulties in some commercial
environments, because the consequent requirement for the user to supply a new set of
authentication details at an arbitrary point in the interaction might intrude on the
application.


===== page 529 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 511
Figure 11.16 TLS protocol stack(cid:3)
(Figures 11.16 to 11.19 are based on diagrams in Hirsch [1997] and are used with Frederick Hirsch’s permission)
TLS
TLS Change TLS Alert
Handshake HTTP Telnet • • • • •
Cipher Spec Protocol
Protocol
TLS Record Protocol
Transport layer (usually TCP)
Network layer (usually IP)
TLS protocols: Other protocols:
11.6.3 Securing electronic transactions with secure sockets
The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol was originally developed by the Netscape
Corporation [www.mozilla.org] and proposed as a standard specifically to meet the
needs described below. An extended version of SSL has been adopted as an Internet
standard under the name Transport Layer Security (TLS), described in RFC 2246
[Dierks and Allen 1999]. TLS is supported by most browsers and is widely used in
Internet commerce. We explore its main features below:
Negotiable encryption and authentication algorithms • In an open network we should
not assume that all parties use the same client software or that all client and server
software includes a particular encryption algorithm. In fact, the laws of some countries
attempt to restrict the use of certain encryption algorithms to those countries alone. TLS
has been designed so that the algorithms used for encryption and authentication are
negotiated between the processes at the two ends of the connection during the initial
handshake. It may turn out that they do not have sufficient algorithms in common, and
in that case the connection attempt will fail.
Bootstrapped secure communication • To meet the need for secure communication
without previous negotiation or help from third parties, the secure channel is established
using a protocol similar to the hybrid scheme mentioned in Section 11.3.3. Unencrypted
communication is used for the initial exchanges, then public-key cryptography and
finally secret-key cryptography once a shared secret key has been established. Each
switch is optional and preceded by a negotiation.
Thus the secure channel is fully configurable, allowing communication in each
direction to be encrypted and authenticated but not requiring it, so that computing
resources need not be consumed in performing unnecessary encryption.
The details of the TLS protocol are published and standardized, and several
software libraries and toolkits are available to support it [Hirsch 1997,
www.openssl.org], some of them in the public domain. It has been incorporated in a
wide range of application software, and its security has been verified by independent
review.


===== page 530 =====
512 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
TLS consists of two layers (Figure 11.16): TLS Record Protocol layer, which
implements a secure channel, encrypting and authenticating messages transmitted
through any connection-oriented protocol; and a handshake layer, containing the TLS
handshake protocol and two other related protocols that establish and maintain a TLS
session (that is, a secure channel) between a client and a server. Both are usually
implemented by software libraries at the application level in the client and the server.
The TLS record protocol is a session-level layer; it can be used to transport application-
level data transparently between a pair of processes while guaranteeing its secrecy,
integrity and authenticity. These are exactly the properties we specified for secure
channels in our security model (Section 2.4.3), but in TLS there are options for the
communicating partners to choose whether or not to deploy decryption and
authentication of messages in each direction. Each secure session is given an identifier,
and each partner can store session identifiers in a cache for subsequent reuse, avoiding
the overhead of establishing a new session when another secure session with the same
partner is required.
TLS is widely used to add a secure communication layer below existing
application-level protocols. It is probably most widely used to secure HTTP interactions
for use in Internet commerce and other security-sensitive applications. It is implemented
by virtually all web browsers and web servers: the use of the protocol prefix https: in
URLs initiates the establishment of a TLS secure channel between a browser and a web
server. It has also been widely deployed to provide secure implementations of Telnet,
FTP and many other application protocols. TLS is the de facto standard for use in
applications requiring secure channels; there is a wide choice of available
implementations, both commercial and public-domain, with APIs for CORBA and Java.
The TLS handshake protocol is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The handshake is
performed over an existing connection. It begins in the clear and it establishes a TLS
session by exchanging the agreed options and parameters needed to perform encryption
and authentication. The handshake sequence varies depending on whether client and
server authentication are required. The handshake protocol may also be invoked at a
later time to change the specification of a secure channel – for example, communication
may begin with message authentication using message authentication codes only, and at
a later point, encryption may be added. This is achieved by performing the handshake
protocol again to negotiate a new cipher specification using the existing channel.
The TLS initial handshake is potentially vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks,
as described in Section 11.2.2, Scenario 3. To protect against them, the public key used
to verify the first certificate received may be delivered by a separate channel – for
example, browsers and other Internet software delivered on a CD-ROM may include a
set of public keys for some well-known certificate authorities. Another defence for the
clients of well-known services is based on the inclusion of the service’s domain name in
its public-key certificates – clients should only deal with the service at the IP address
corresponding to that domain name.
TLS supports a variety of options for the cryptographic functions to be used.
These are collectively known as a cipher suite. A cipher suite includes a single choice
for each of the features shown in Figure 11.18.
A variety of popular cipher suites are preloaded, with standard identifiers in the
client and the server. During the handshake, the server offers the client a list of the cipher
suite identifiers that it has available, and the client responds by selecting one of them (or


===== page 531 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 513
Figure 11.17 TLS handshake protocol
Establish protocol version, session
ClientHello
ID, cipher suite, compression
ServerHello
method, exchange random values
Certificate
Optionally send server certificate
Certificate Request
and request client certificate
ServerHelloDone
Client Certificate Server Send client certificate response if
Certificate Verify requested
Change Cipher Spec
Change cipher suite and finish
Finished
handshake
Change Cipher Spec
Finished
giving an error indication if it has none that match). At this stage they also agree on a
(optional) compression method and a random start value for CBC block encryption
functions (see Section 11.3).
Next, the partners optionally authenticate each other by exchanging signed public-
keycertificates in X.509 format. These certificates may be obtained from a public-key
authority or they may simply be generated temporarily for the purpose. In any case, at
least one public key must be available for use in the next stage of the handshake.
One partner then generates a pre-master secret and sends it to the other partner
encrypted with the public key. A pre-master secret is a large random value that is used
by both partners to generate the two session keys (called write keys) for encrypting data
Figure 11.18 TLS handshake configuration options
Component Description Example
Key exchange The method to be used for RSA with public-key
method exchange of a session key certificates
Cipher for data The block or stream cipher to be IDEA
transfer used for data
Message digest For creating message SHA-1
function authentication codes (MACs)


===== page 532 =====
514 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.19 TLS record protocol
Application data abcdefghi
Fragment/combine
Record protocol units abc def ghi
Compress
Compressed units
Hash
MAC
Encrypt
Encrypted
Transmit
TCP packet
in each direction and the message authentication secrets to be used for message
authentication. When all this has been done, a secure session begins. This is triggered
by the ChangeCipherSpec messages exchanged between the partners. These are
followed by Finished messages. Once the Finished messages have been exchanged, all
further communication is encrypted and signed according to the chosen cipher suite with
the agreed keys.
Figure 11.19 shows the operation of the record protocol. A message for
transmission is first fragmented into blocks of a manageable size, then the blocks are
optionally compressed. Compression is not strictly a feature of secure communication,
but it is provided here because a compression algorithm can usefully share some of the
work of processing the bulk data with the encryption and digital signature algorithms.
In other words, a pipeline of data transformations can be set up within the TLS record
layer that will perform all of the transformations required more efficiently than could be
done independently.
The encryption and message authentication (MAC) transformations deploy the
algorithms specified in the agreed cipher suite exactly as described in Sections 11.3.1
and11.4.2. Finally, the signed and encrypted block is transmitted to the partner through
the associated TCP connection, where the transformations are reversed to produce the
original data block.
Summary • TLS provides a practical implementation of a hybrid encryption scheme
with authentication and key exchange based on public keys. Because the ciphers are
negotiated in the handshake, it does not depend upon the availability of any particular
algorithms. Nor does it depend upon any secure services at the time of session


===== page 533 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 515
establishment. The only requirement is that the public-key certificates are issued by an
authority recognized by both parties.
Because the SSL basis for TLS and its reference implementation were published
[www.mozilla.org], it was the subject of review and debate. Some amendments were
made to the early designs, and it was widely endorsed as a valuable standard. TLS is now
integrated in most web browsers and web servers and is used in other applications such
as secure Telnet and FTP. Commercial and public-domain [www.rsasecurity.com I,
Hirsch 1997, www.openssl.org] implementations are widely available in the form of
libraries and browser plug-ins.
11.6.4 Weaknesses in the original IEEE 802.11 WiFi security design
The IEEE 802.11 standard for wireless LANs described in Section 3.5.2 was first
released in 1999 [IEEE 1999]. It was implemented in base stations, laptops and portable
devices from a similar date and widely used for mobile communication. Unfortunately,
the security design in the standard was subsequently found to be severely inadequate in
several respects. We outline that initial design and its weaknesses as a case study in the
difficulties of security design already referred to in Section 11.1.3.
It was recognized that wireless networks are by their nature more exposed to
attack than wired networks because the network and the transmitted data are available
for eavesdropping and masquerading by any device equipped with a transmitter/receiver
within range. The initial 802.11 design therefore aimed to provide access control for
WiFi networks and privacy and integrity for the data transmitted on them through a
security specification entitled Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), which embodies the
following measures, that can optionally be activated by a network administrator:
Access control by a challenge-response protocol (cf. Kerberos, Section 11.6.2), in
which a joining node is challenged by the base station to demonstrate that it has the
correct shared key. A single key, K, is assigned by a network administrator and
shared between the base station and all authorized devices.
Privacy and integrity using an optional encryption mechanism based on the RC4
stream cipher. The same key, K, used for access control is also used in encryption.
There are key length options of 40, 64 or 128 bits. An encrypted checksum is
included in each packet to protect its integrity.
The following deficiencies and design weaknesses were discovered soon after the
standard was deployed:
The sharing of a single key by all users of a network renders the design weak in
practice, since:
– The key is liable to be transmitted to new users on unprotected channels.
– A single careless or malicious user (such as a disgruntled former employee)
who has gained access to the key can compromise the security of the entire
network, and this can go undiscovered.
Solution: Use a public-key-based protocol for negotiating individual keys, as is
done in TLS/SSL (see Section 11.6.3).


===== page 534 =====
516 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
Figure 11.20 Use of RC4 stream cipher in IEEE 802.11 WEP
Encryption Decryption
Increment
IV IV
K K
RC4 RC4
keystream
plaintext XOR cipher text IV cipher text IV XOR plaintext
IV: initial value
K: shared key
Base stations are never authenticated, so an attacker who knows the current shared
key could introduce a spoof base station and eavesdrop on, insert or tamper with any
traffic.
Solution: Base stations should supply a certificate that can be authenticated by
the use of a public key obtained from a third party.
Inappropriate use of a stream cipher rather than a block cipher (see descriptions of
block and stream ciphers in Section 11.3). Figure 11.20 shows the process of
encryption and decyption in 802.11 WEP security. Each packet is encrypted by
XOR-ing its content with a keystream produced by the RC4 algorithm. The receiving
station uses RC4 to generate the same keystream and decrypts the packet with
another XOR. To avoid keystream synchronization errors when packets are lost or
corrupted, RC4 is restarted with a start value consisting of a 24-bit initial value
concatenated with the globally shared key. The initial value is updated and included
(in the clear) in each packet transmitted. The shared key cannot easily be changed in
normal use, so the starting value has only s = 224 (or about 107) different states,
resulting in the repetition of the start value and hence the keystream, after 107 packets
are sent. In practice this can occur within a few hours, and even shorter repetition
cycles can arise if packets are lost. An attacker receiving the encrypted packets can
always detect repetitions since the initial value is sent in the clear.
The RC4 specification explicitly warns against keystream repetition. This is
because an attacker who receivesan encrypted packet C and knows the plain text P
i i
(for example, by guessing that it is a standard enquiry to a server) can calculate the
keystream K used to encrypt the packet. The same value of K will recur after s
i i
packets are transmitted, and the attacker can use it to decrypt the newly transmitted


===== page 535 =====
SECTION 11.6 CASE STUDIES: NEEDHAM–SCHROEDER, KERBEROS, TLS, 802.11 WIFI 517
packet. The attacker may eventually succeed in decrypting a high proportion of
packets in this manner by guessing plaintext packets correctly. This weakness was
first pointed out by Borisov et al. [2001] and led to a major reappraisal of WEP
security and its replacement in later versions of 802.11.
Solution: Negotiate a new key after a time less than the worst case for repetition.
An explicit termination code would be needed, as is the case in TLS.
Key lengths of 40 bits and 64 bits were included in the standard to enable products to
be shipped abroad by US suppliers at a time when the US government regulations
referred to in Section 11.5.2 restricted key lengths for exported devices to 40 bits (and
subsequently 64 bits). But 40-bit keys are so easily cracked by brute force that they
offer very little security, and even 64-bit keys are potentially crackable with a
determined attack.
Solution: Use 128-bit keys only. This has been adopted in many recent WiFi
products.
The RC4 stream cipher was shown, after publication of the 802.11 standard, to have
weaknesses that enabled the key to be discovered after observation of a substantial
quantity of traffic even without repetition of the keystream [Fluhrer et al. 2001]. This
weakness was demonstrated in practice. It rendered the WEP scheme insecure even
with 128-bit keys and led some companies to ban the use of WiFi networks by their
employees.
Solution: Provide for the negotiation of cipher specifications as is done in TLS,
giving a choice of encryption algorithms. RC4 is hard-wired into the WEP
standard, with no provision for the negotiation of encryption algorithms.
Users often didn’t deploy the protection offered by the WEP scheme, probably
because they didn’t realize just how exposed their data was. This was not a weakness
in the design of the standard but in the marketing of products based on it. Most were
designed to start up with security disabled and their documentation of the security
risks was often weak.
Solution: Better default settings and documentation can help. Users want to
obtain optimum performance, though, and communication was perceptibly slower
with encryption enabled using the hardware available at the time. Attempts to
avoid the use of WEP encryption led to the addition to base stations of features for
the suppression of the identifying packets normally broadcast by base stations and
the rejection of packets not sent from an authorized MAC address (see Section
3.5.1). Neither of these offered much security, since a network can be discovered
by intercepting (‘sniffing’) packets in transmission and MAC addresses can be
spoofed by operating system modifications.
IEEE set up a dedicated task group to create a replacement security solution and their
work led to a completely new security protocol known as Wi-Fi Protected Access
(WPA). This was specified in the IEEE 802.11i draft [IEEE 2004b, Edney and Arbaugh
2003], and started to appear in products in mid-2003. IEEE 802.11i (also known as
WPA2) itself was ratified in June 2004, and uses AES encryption, instead of RC4, which
was used in WEP. Subsequent developments of IEEE 802.11 also incorporate WPA2.


===== page 536 =====
518 CHAPTER 11 SECURITY
11.7 Summary
Threats to the security of distributed systems are pervasive. It is essential to protect the
communication channels and the interfaces of any system that handles information that
could be the subject of attacks. Personal mail, electronic commerce and other financial
transactions are all examples of such information. Security protocols are carefully
designed to guard against loopholes. The design of secure systems starts from a list of
threats and a set of ‘worst case’ assumptions.
Security mechanisms are based on public-key and secret-key cryptography.
Cryptographic algorithms scramble messages in a manner that cannot be reversed
without knowledge of the decryption key. Secret-key cryptography is symmetric – the
same key serves for both encryption and decryption. If two parties share a secret key,
they can exchange encrypted information without risk of eavesdropping or tampering
and with guarantees of authenticity.
Public-key cryptography is asymmetric – separate keys are used for encryption
and decryption, and knowledge of one does not reveal the other. One key is made public,
enabling anyone to send secure messages to the holder of the corresponding private key
and allowing the holder of the private key to sign messages and certificates. Certificates
can act as credentials for the use of protected resources.
Resources are protected by access-control mechanisms. Access-control schemes
assign rights to principals (that is, the holders of credentials) to perform operations on
distributed objects and collections of objects. Rights may be held in access control lists
(ACLs) associated with collections of objects or they may be held by principals in the
form of capabilities – unforgeable keys for access to collections of resources.
Capabilities are convenient for the delegation of access rights but are hard to revoke.
Changes to ACLs take effect immediately, revoking the previous access rights, but they
are more complex and costly to manage than capabilities.
Until recently, the DES encryption algorithm was the most widely used symmetric
encryption scheme, but its 56-bit keys are no longer safe against brute-force attacks. The
triple version of DES gives 112-bit key strength, which is safe, but other modern
algorithms (such as IDEA and AES) are much faster and provide greater strength.
RSA is the most widely used asymmetric encryption scheme. For safety against
factoring attacks, it should be used with 768-bit keys or greater. Public-key
(asymmetric) algorithms are outperformed by secret-key (symmetric) algorithms by
several orders of magnitude, so they are generally used only in hybrid protocols such as
TLS, for the establishment of secure channels that use shared keys for subsequent
exchanges.
The Needham–Schroeder authentication protocol was the first general-purpose,
practical security protocol, and it still provides the basis for many practical systems.
Kerberos is a well-designed scheme for the authentication of users and the protection of
services within a single organization. Kerberos is based on Needham–Schroeder and
symmetric cryptography. TLS is the security protocol designed for and used widely in
electronic commerce. It is a flexible protocol for the establishment and use of secure
channels based on both symmetric and asymmetric cryptography. The weaknesses of
IEEE 802.11 WiFi security provide an object lesson in the difficulties of security design.


===== page 537 =====
EXERCISES 519
EXERCISES
11.1 Describe some of the physical security policies in your organization. Express them in
terms that could be implemented in a computerized door locking system. page 464
11.2 Describe some of the ways in which conventional email is vulnerable to eavesdropping,
masquerading, tampering, replay and denial of service attacks. Suggest methods by
which email could be protected against each of these forms of attack. page 466
11.3 Initial exchanges of public keys are vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks. Describe
as many defences against it as you can. pages 473,511
11.4 PGP is often used to secure email communication. Describe the steps that a pair of users
using PGP must take before they can exchange email messages with privacy and
authenticity guarantees. What scope is there to make the preliminary key negotiation
invisible to users? (The PGP negotiation is an instance of the hybrid scheme.)(cid:3)
pages 493,502
11.5 How would email be sent to a large list of recipients using PGP or a similar scheme?
Suggest a scheme that is simpler and faster when the list is used frequently.(cid:3)
page 502, Section 4.4
11.6 The implementation of the TEA symmetric encryption algorithm given in Figures
11.7–11.9 is not portable between all machine architectures. Explain why. How could a
message encrypted using the TEA implementation be transmitted to decrypt it correctly
on all other architectures? page 488
11.7 Modify the TEA application program in Figure 11.9 to use cipher block chaining (CBC).(cid:3)
pages 485,488
11.8 Construct a stream cipher application based on the program in Figure 11.9.(cid:3)
pages 486,488
11.9 Estimate the time required to crack a 56-bit DES key by a brute-force attack using a
2000 MIPS (million instruction per second) computer, assuming that the inner loop for
a brute-force attack program involves around 10 instructions per key value, plus the time
to encrypt an 8-byte plaintext (see Figure 11.13). Perform the same calculation for a
128-bit IDEA key. Extrapolate your calculations to obtain the cracking time for a
200,000 MIPS parallel processor (or an Internet consortium with similar processing
power).(cid:3)
page 489
11.10 In the Needham and Shroeder authentication protocol with secret keys, explain why the
following version of message 5 is not secure:
A(cid:111) B: {NB}
KAB
page 504
11.11 Review the solutions proposed in the discussion of the 802.11 Wireless Equivalent
Privacy protocol design, outlining ways in which each solution could be implemented
and mentioning any drawbacks or inconveniences. (5 answers) page 515


===== page 538 =====  [ocr]
This page intentionally left blank


===== page 539 =====
12
DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
12.1 Introduction
12.2 File service architecture
12.3 Case study: Sun Network File System
12.4 Case study: The Andrew File System
12.5 Enhancements and further developments
12.6 Summary
A distributed file system enables programs to store and access remote files exactly as they
do local ones, allowing users to access files from any computer on a network. The
performance and reliability experienced for access to files stored at a server should be
comparable to that for files stored on local disks.
In this chapter we define a simple architecture for file systems and describe two
basic distributed file service implementations with contrasting designs that have been in
widespread use for over two decades:
• the Sun Network File System, NFS;
• the Andrew File System, AFS.
Each emulates the UNIX file system interface, with differing degrees of scalability, fault
tolerance and deviation from the strict UNIX one-copy file update semantics.
Several related file systems that exploit new modes of data organization on disk or
across multiple servers to achieve high-performance, fault-tolerant and scalable file
systems are also reviewed. Other types of distributed storage system are described
elsewhere in the book. These include peer-to-peer storage systems (Chapter 10),
replicated file systems (Chapter 18), multimedia data servers (Chapter 20) and the
particular style of storage service required to support Internet search and other large-
scale, data-intensive applications (Chapter 21).
521


===== page 540 =====
522 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
12.1 Introduction
In Chapters 1 and 2, we identified the sharing of resources as a key goal for distributed
systems. The sharing of stored information is perhaps the most important aspect of
distributed resource sharing. Mechanisms for data sharing take many forms and are
described in several parts of this book. Web servers provide a restricted form of data
sharing in which files stored locally, in file systems at the server or in servers on a local
network, are made available to clients throughout the Internet. The design of large-scale
wide area read-write file storage systems poses problems of load balancing, reliability,
availability and security, whose resolution is the goal of the peer-to-peer file storage
systems described in Chapter 10. Chapter 18 focuses on replicated storage systems that
are suitable for applications requiring reliable access to data stored on systems where the
availability of individual hosts cannot be guaranteed. In Chapter 20 we describe a media
server that is designed to serve streams of video data to large numbers of users in real
time. Chapter 21 describes a file system designed to support large-scale, data-intensive
applications such as Internet search.
The requirements for sharing within local networks and intranets lead to a need
for a different type of service – one that supports the persistent storage of data and
programs of all types on behalf of clients and the consistent distribution of up-to-date
data. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the architecture and implementation of
thesebasic distributed file systems. We use the word ‘basic’ here to denote distributed
file systems whose primary purpose is to emulate the functionality of a non-distributed
file system for client programs running on multiple remote computers. They do not
maintain multiple persistent replicas of files, nor do they support the bandwidth and
timing guarantees required for multimedia data streaming – those requirements are
addressed in later chapters. Basic distributed file systems provide an essential
underpinning for organizational computing based on intranets.
File systems were originally developed for centralized computer systems and
desktop computers as an operating system facility providing a convenient programming
interface to disk storage. They subsequently acquired features such as access-control
and file-locking mechanisms that made them useful for the sharing of data and
programs. Distributed file systems support the sharing of information in the form of files
and hardware resources in the form of persistent storage throughout an intranet. A well-
designed file service provides access to files stored at a server with performance and
reliability similar to, and in some cases better than, files stored on local disks. Their
design is adapted to the performance and reliability characteristics of local networks,
and hence they are most effective in providing shared persistent storage for use in
intranets. The first file servers were developed by researchers in the 1970s [Birrell and
Needham 1980, Mitchell and Dion 1982, Leach et al. 1983], and Sun’s Network File
System became available in the early 1980s [Sandberg et al. 1985, Callaghan 1999].
A file service enables programs to store and access remote files exactly as they do
local ones, allowing users to access their files from any computer in an intranet. The
concentration of persistent storage at a few servers reduces the need for local disk
storage and (more importantly) enables economies to be made in the management and
archiving of the persistent data owned by an organization. Other services, such as the
name service, the user authentication service and the print service, can be more easily


===== page 541 =====
SECTION 12.1 INTRODUCTION 523
Figure 12.1 Storage systems and their properties
Sharing Persistence Distributed(cid:3) Consistency(cid:3) Example
cache/replicas maintenance
Main memory 1 RAM
File system 1 UNIX file system
Distributed file system Sun NFS
Web Web server
Distributed shared memory Ivy (DSM, Ch. 6)
Remote objects (RMI/ORB) 1 CORBA
Persistent object store 1 CORBA Persistent (cid:3)
State Service
Peer-to-peer storage system 2 OceanStore (Ch. 10)
Types of consistency:(cid:3)
1: strict one-copy : slightly weaker guarantees 2: considerably weaker guarantees
implemented when they can call upon the file service to meet their needs for persistent
storage. Web servers are reliant on filing systems for the storage of the web pages that
they serve. In organizations that operate web servers for external and internal access via
an intranet, the web servers often store and access the material from a local distributed
file system.
With the advent of distributed object-oriented programming, a need arose for the
persistent storage and distribution of shared objects. One way to achieve this is to
serialize objects (in the manner described in Section 4.3.2) and to store and retrieve the
serialized objects using files. But this method for achieving persistence and distribution
is impractical for rapidly changing objects, so several more direct approaches have been
developed. Java remote object invocation and CORBA ORBs provide access to remote,
shared objects, but neither of these ensures the persistence of the objects, nor are the
distributed objects replicated.
Figure 12.1 provides an overview of types of storage system. In addition to those
already mentioned, the table includes distributed shared memory (DSM) systems and
persistent object stores. DSM was described in Chapter 6. It provides an emulation of a
shared memory by the replication of memory pages or segments at each host, but it does
not necessarily provide automatic persistence. Persistent object stores were introduced
in Chapter 5. They aim to provide persistence for distributed shared objects. Examples
include the CORBA Persistent State Service (see Chapter 8) and persistent extensions
to Java [Jordan 1996, java.sun.com VIII]. Some research projects have developed in
platforms that support the automatic replication and persistent storage of objects (for
example, PerDiS [Ferreira et al. 2000] and Khazana [Carter et al. 1998]). Peer-to-peer
storage systems offer scalability to support client loads much larger than the systems
described in this chaper, but they incur high performance costs in providing secure
access control and consistency between updatable replicas.


===== page 542 =====
524 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.2 File system modules
Directory module: relates file names to file IDs(cid:3)
File module: relates file IDs to particular files(cid:3)
Access control module: checks permission for operation requested(cid:3)
File access module: reads or writes file data or attributes(cid:3)
Block module: accesses and allocates disk blocks(cid:3)
Device module: performs disk I/O and buffering
Theconsistency column indicates whether mechanisms exist for the maintenance
of consistency between multiple copies of data when updates occur. Virtually all storage
systems rely on the use of caching to optimize the performance of programs. Caching
was first applied to main memory and non-distributed file systems, and for those the
consistency is strict (denoted by a ‘1’, for one-copy consistency in Figure 12.1) –
programs cannot observe any discrepancies between cached copies and stored data after
an update. When distributed replicas are used, strict consistency is more difficult to
achieve. Distributed file systems such as Sun NFS and the Andrew File System cache
copies of portions of files at client computers, and they adopt specific consistency
mechanisms to maintain an approximation to strict consistency – this is indicated by a
tick ( ) in the consistency column of Figure 12.1. We discuss these mechanisms and
the degree to which they deviate from strict consistency in Sections 12.3 and 12.4.
The Web uses caching extensively both at client computers and at proxy servers
maintained by user organizations. The consistency between the copies stored at web
proxies and client caches and the original server is only maintained by explicit user
actions. Clients are not notified when a page stored at the original server is updated; they
must perform explicit checks to keep their local copies up-to-date. This serves the
purposes of web browsing adequately, but it does not support the development of
cooperative applications such as a shared distributed whiteboard. The consistency
mechanisms used in DSM systems are discussed in depth on the companion web site to
the book [www.cdk5.net]. Persistent object systems vary considerably in their approach
to caching and consistency. The CORBA and Persistent Java schemes maintain single
copies of persistent objects, and remote invocation is required to access them, so the
only consistency issue is between the persistent copy of an object on disk and the active
copy in memory, which is not visible to remote clients. The PerDiS and Khazana
projects that we mentioned above maintain cached replicas of objects and employ quite
elaborate consistency mechanisms to produce forms of consistency similar to those
found in DSM systems.
Having introduced some wider issues relating to storage and distribution of
persistent and non-persistent data, we now return to the main topic of this chapter – the
design of basic distributed file systems. We describe some relevant characteristics of
(non-distributed) file systems in Section 12.1.1 and the requirements for distributed file
systems in Section 12.1.2. Section 12.1.3 introduces the case studies that will be used
throughout the chapter. In Section 12.2, we define an abstract model for a basic


===== page 543 =====
SECTION 12.1 INTRODUCTION 525
Figure 12.3 File attribute record structure
File length
Creation timestamp
Read timestamp
Write timestamp
Attribute timestamp
Reference count
Owner
File type
Access control list
distributed file service, including a set of programming interfaces. Sun NFS is described
in Section 12.3; it shares many of the features of the abstract model. In Section 12.4 we
describe the Andrew File System, a widely used system that employs substantially
different caching and consistency mechanisms. Section 12.5 reviews some recent
developments in the design of file services.
The systems described in this chapter do not cover the full spectrum of distributed
file and data management systems. Several systems with more advanced characteristics
will be described later in the book. Chapter 18 includes a description of Coda, a
distributed file system that maintains persistent replicas of files for reliability,
availability and disconnected working. Bayou, a distributed data management system
that provides a weakly consistent form of replication for high availability, is also
covered in Chapter 18. Chapter 20 covers the Tiger video file server, which is designed
to provide timely delivery of streams of data to large numbers of clients. Chapter 21
describes the Google File System (GFS), a file system designed specifically to support
large-scale, data-intensive applications including Internet search.
12.1.1 Characteristics of file systems
File systems are responsible for the organization, storage, retrieval, naming, sharing and
protection of files. They provide a programming interface that characterizes the file
abstraction, freeing programmers from concern with the details of storage allocation and
layout. Files are stored on disks or other non-volatile storage media.
Files contain both data and attributes. The data consist of a sequence of data items
(typically 8-bit bytes), accessible by operations to read and write any portion of the
sequence. The attributes are held as a single record containing information such as the
length of the file, timestamps, file type, owner’s identity and access control lists. A
typical attribute record structure is illustrated in Figure 12.3. The shaded attributes are
managed by the file system and are notnormally updatable by user programs.


===== page 544 =====
526 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.4 UNIX file system operations
filedes = open(name, mode) Opens an existing file with the given name.
filedes = creat(name, mode) Creates a new file with the given name.
Both operations deliver a file descriptor referencing the open
file. The mode is read,write or both.
status = close(filedes) Closes the open file filedes.
count = read(filedes, buffer, n) Transfersn bytes from the file referenced by filedes to buffer.
count = write(filedes, buffer, n) Transfersn bytes to the file referenced by filedes from buffer.
Both operations deliver the number of bytes actually
transferred and advance the read-write pointer.
pos = lseek(filedes, offset, (cid:3) Moves the read-write pointer to offset (relative or absolute,
whence) depending on whence).
status = unlink(name) Removes the file name from the directory structure. If the file
has no other names, it is deleted.
status = link(name1, name2) Adds a new name (name2) for a file (name1).
status = stat(name, buffer) Puts the file attributes for file name into buffer.
File systems are designed to store and manage large numbers of files, with
facilities for creating, naming and deleting files. The naming of files is supported by the
use of directories. A directory is a file, often of a special type, that provides a mapping
from text names to internal file identifiers. Directories may include the names of other
directories, leading to the familiar hierarchic file-naming scheme and the multi-part
pathnames for files used in UNIX and other operating systems. File systems also take
responsibility for the control of access to files, restricting access to files according to
users’ authorizations and the type of access requested (reading, updating, executing and
so on).
The term metadata is often used to refer to all of the extra information stored by
a file system that is needed for the management of files. It includes file attributes,
directories and all the other persistent information used by the file system.
Figure 12.2 shows a typical layered module structure for the implementation of a
non-distributed file system in a conventional operating system. Each layer depends only
on the layers below it. The implementation of a distributed file service requires all of the
components shown there, with additional components to deal with client-server
communication and with the distributed naming and location of files.
File system operations • Figure 12.4 summarizes the main operations on files that are
available to applications in UNIX systems. These are the system calls implemented by
the kernel; application programmers usually access them through procedure libraries
such as the C Standard Input/Output Library or the Java file classes. We give the
primitives here as an indication of the operations that file services are expected to
support and for comparison with the file service interfaces that we shall introduce below.


===== page 545 =====
SECTION 12.1 INTRODUCTION 527
The UNIX operations are based on a programming model in which some file state
information is stored by the file system for each running program. This consists of a list
of currently open files with a read-write pointer for each, giving the position within the
file at which the next read or write operation will be applied.
The file system is responsible for applying access control for files. In local file
systems such as UNIX, it does so when each file is opened, checking the rights allowed
for the user’s identity in the access control list against the mode of access requested in
the open system call. If the rights match the mode, the file is opened and the mode is
recorded in the open file state information.
12.1.2 Distributed file system requirements
Many of the requirements and potential pitfalls in the design of distributed services were
first observed in the early development of distributed file systems. Initially, they offered
access transparency and location transparency; performance, scalability, concurrency
control, fault tolerance and security requirements emerged and were met in subsequent
phases of development. We discuss these and related requirements in the following
subsections.
Transparency • The file service is usually the most heavily loaded service in an intranet,
so its functionality and performance are critical. The design of the file service should
support many of the transparency requirements for distributed systems identified in
Section 1.5.7. The design must balance the flexibility and scalability that derive from
transparency against software complexity and performance. The following forms of
transparency are partially or wholly addressed by current file services:
Access transparency: Client programs should be unaware of the distribution of files.
A single set of operations is provided for access to local and remote files. Programs
written to operate on local files are able to access remote files without modification.
Location transparency: Client programs should see a uniform file name space. Files
or groups of files may be relocated without changing their pathnames, and user
programs see the same name space wherever they are executed.
Mobility transparency: Neither client programs nor system administration tables in
client nodes need to be changed when files are moved. This allows file mobility –
files or, more commonly, sets or volumes of files may be moved, either by system
administrators or automatically.
Performance transparency: Client programs should continue to perform satisfacto-
rily while the load on the service varies within a specified range.
Scaling transparency: The service can be expanded by incremental growth to deal
with a wide range of loads and network sizes.
Concurrent file updates • Changes to a file by one client should not interfere with the
operation of other clients simultaneously accessing or changing the same file. This is the
well-known issue of concurrency control, discussed in detail in Chapter 16. The need for
concurrency control for access to shared data in many applications is widely accepted
and techniques are known for its implementation, but they are costly. Most current file


===== page 546 =====
528 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
services follow modern UNIX standards in providing advisory or mandatory file- or
record-level locking.
File replication • In a file service that supports replication, a file may be represented by
several copies of its contents at different locations. This has two benefits – it enables
multiple servers to share the load of providing a service to clients accessing the same set
of files, enhancing the scalability of the service, and it enhances fault tolerance by
enabling clients to locate another server that holds a copy of the file when one has failed.
Few file services support replication fully, but most support the caching of files or
portions of files locally, a limited form of replication. The replication of data is
discussed in Chapter 18, which includes a description of the Coda replicated file service.
Hardware and operating system heterogeneity • The service interfaces should be de-
fined so that client and server software can be implemented for different operating sys-
tems and computers. This requirement is an important aspect of openness.
Faulttolerance • The central role of the file service in distributed systems makes it
essential that the service continue to operate in the face of client and server failures.
Fortunately, a moderately fault-tolerant design is straightforward for simple servers. To
cope with transient communication failures, the design can be based on at-most-once
invocation semantics (see Section 5.3.1); or it can use the simpler at-least-once
semantics with a server protocol designed in terms of idempotent operations, ensuring
that duplicated requests do not result in invalid updates to files. The servers can be
stateless, so that they can be restarted and the service restored after a failure without any
need to recover previous state. Tolerance of disconnection or server failures requires file
replication, which is more difficult to achieve and will be discussed in Chapter 18.
Consistency • Conventional file systems such as that provided in UNIX offer one-copy
update semantics. This refers to a model for concurrent access to files in which the file
contents seen by all of the processes accessing or updating a given file are those that they
would see if only a single copy of the file contents existed. When files are replicated or
cached at different sites, there is an inevitable delay in the propagation of modifications
made at one site to all of the other sites that hold copies, and this may result in some
deviation from one-copy semantics.
Security • Virtually all file systems provide access-control mechanisms based on the
use of access control lists. In distributed file systems, there is a need to authenticate
client requests so that access control at the server is based on correct user identities and
to protect the contents of request and reply messages with digital signatures and
(optionally) encryption of secret data. We discuss the impact of these requirements in
the case studies later in this chapter.
Efficiency • A distributed file service should offer facilities that are of at least the same
power and generality as those found in conventional file systems and should achieve a
comparable level of performance. Birrell and Needham [1980] expressed their design
aims for the Cambridge File Server (CFS) in these terms:
We would wish to have a simple, low-level file server in order to share an
expensive resource, namely a disk, whilst leaving us free to design the filing
system most appropriate to a particular client, but we would wish also to have
available a high-level system shared between clients.


===== page 547 =====
SECTION 12.1 INTRODUCTION 529
The changed economics of disk storage have reduced the significance of their first goal,
but their perception of the need for a range of services addressing the requirements of
clients with different goals remains and can best be addressed by a modular architecture
of the type outlined above.
The techniques used for the implementation of file services are an important part
of the design of distributed systems. A distributed file system should provide a service
that is comparable with, or better than, local file systems in performance and reliability.
It must be convenient to administer, providing operations and tools that enable system
administrators to install and operate the system conveniently.
12.1.3 Case studies
We have constructed an abstract model for a file service to act as an introductory
example, separating implementation concerns and providing a simplified model. We
describe the Sun Network File System in some detail, drawing on our simpler abstract
model to clarify its architecture. The Andrew File System is then described, providing a
view of a distributed file system that takes a different approach to scalability and
consistency maintenance.
File service architecture • This is an abstract architectural model that underpins both
NFS and AFS. It is based upon a division of responsibilities between three modules – a
client module that emulates a conventional file system interface for application
programs, and server modules, that perform operations for clients on directories and on
files. The architecture is designed to enable a stateless implementation of the server
module.
SUN NFS • Sun Microsystems’s Network File System (NFS) has been widely adopted
in industry and in academic environments since its introduction in 1985. The design and
development of NFS were undertaken by staff at Sun Microsystems in 1984 [Sandberg
et al. 1985, Sandberg 1987, Callaghan 1999]. Although several distributed file services
had already been developed and used in universities and research laboratories, NFS was
the first file service that was designed as a product. The design and implementation of
NFS have achieved success both technically and commercially.
To encourage its adoption as a standard, the definitions of the key interfaces were
placed in the public domain [Sun 1989], enabling other vendors to produce
implementations, and the source code for a reference implementation was made
available to other computer vendors under licence. It is now supported by many vendors,
and the NFS protocol (version 3) is an Internet standard, defined in RFC 1813
[Callaghan et al. 1995]. Callaghan’s book on NFS [Callaghan 1999] is an excellent
source on the design and development of NFS and related topics.
NFS provides transparent access to remote files for client programs running on
UNIX and other systems. The client-server relationship is symmetrical: each computer
in an NFS network can act as both a client and a server, and the files at every machine
can be made available for remote access by other machines. Any computer can be a
server, exporting some of its files, and a client, accessing files on other machines. But it
is common practice to configure larger installations with some machines as dedicated
servers and others as workstations.


===== page 548 =====
530 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
An important goal of NFS is to achieve a high level of support for hardware and
operating system heterogeneity. The design is operating system–independent: client and
server implementations exist for almost all operating systems and platforms, including
all versions of Windows, Mac OS, Linux and every other version of UNIX.
Implementations of NFS on high-performance multiprocessor hosts have been
developed by several vendors, and these are widely used to meet storage requirements
in intranets with many concurrent users.
Andrew File System • Andrew is a distributed computing environment developed at
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) for use as a campus computing and information
system [Morris et al. 1986]. The design of the Andrew File System (henceforth
abbreviated AFS) reflects an intention to support information sharing on a large scale by
minimizing client-server communication. This is achieved by transferring whole files
between server and client computers and caching them at clients until the server receives
a more up-to-date version. We shall describe AFS-2, the first ‘production’
implementation, following the descriptions by Satyanarayanan [1989a, 1989b]. More
recent descriptions can be found in Campbell [1997] and [Linux AFS].
AFS was initially implemented on a network of workstations and servers running
BSD UNIX and the Mach operating system at CMU and was subsequently made
available in commercial and public-domain versions. A public-domain implementation
of AFS is available in the Linux operating system [Linux AFS]. AFS was adopted as the
basis for the DCE/DFS file system in the Open Software Foundation’s Distributed
Computing Environment (DCE) [www.opengroup.org]. The design of DCE/DFS went
beyond AFS in several important respects, which we outline in Section 12.5.
12.2 File service architecture
An architecture that offers a clear separation of the main concerns in providing access
to files is obtained by structuring the file service as three components – a flat file service,
adirectory serviceand aclient module. The relevant modules and their relationships are
shown in Figure 12.5. The flat file service and the directory service each export an
interface for use by client programs, and their RPC interfaces, taken together, provide a
comprehensive set of operations for access to files. The client module provides a single
programming interface with operations on files similar to those found in conventional
file systems. The design is open in the sense that different client modules can be used to
implement different programming interfaces, simulating the file operations of a variety
of different operating systems and optimizing the performance for different client and
server hardware configurations.
The division of responsibilities between the modules can be defined as follows:
Flatfileservice • The flat file service is concerned with implementing operations on the
contents of files. Unique file identifiers (UFIDs) are used to refer to files in all requests
for flat file service operations. The division of responsibilities between the file service
and the directory service is based upon the use of UFIDs. UFIDs are long sequences of
bits chosen so that each file has a UFID that is unique among all of the files in a


===== page 549 =====
SECTION 12.2 FILE SERVICE ARCHITECTURE 531
Figure 12.5 File service architecture
Client computer Server computer
Directory service
Application Application
program program
Flat file service
Client module
distributed system. When the flat file service receives a request to create a file, it
generates a new UFID for it and returns the UFID to the requester.
Directoryservice • The directory service provides a mapping between text names for
files and their UFIDs. Clients may obtain the UFID of a file by quoting its text name to
the directory service. The directory service provides the functions needed to generate
directories, to add new file names to directories and to obtain UFIDs from directories. It
is a client of the flat file service; its directory files are stored in files of the flat file
service. When a hierarchic file-naming scheme is adopted, as in UNIX, directories hold
references to other directories.
Clientmodule • A client module runs in each client computer, integrating and
extending the operations of the flat file service and the directory service under a single
application programming interface that is available to user-level programs in client
computers. For example, in UNIX hosts, a client module would be provided that
emulates the full set of UNIX file operations, interpreting UNIX multi-part file names
by iterative requests to the directory service. The client module also holds information
about the network locations of the flat file server and directory server processes. Finally,
the client module can play an important role in achieving satisfactory performance
through the implementation of a cache of recently used file blocks at the client.
Flat file service interface • Figure 12.6 contains a definition of the interface to a flat file
service. This is the RPC interface used by client modules. It is not normally used directly
by user-level programs. A FileId is invalid if the file that it refers to is not present in the
server processing the request or if its access permissions are inappropriate for the
operation requested. All of the procedures in the interface except Create throw
exceptions if the FileId argument contains an invalid UFID or the user doesn’t have
sufficient access rights. These exceptions are omitted from the definition for clarity.
The most important operations are those for reading and writing. Both the Read
and the Write operation require a parameter i specifying a position in the file. The Read
operation copies the sequence of n data items beginning at item i from the specified file


===== page 550 =====
532 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.6 Flat file service operations
Read(FileId, i, n) (cid:111) Data (cid:3) If 1(cid:100) i (cid:100) Length(File): Reads a sequence of up to n items
—throws BadPosition from a file starting at item i and returns it in Data.
Write(FileId, i, Data) (cid:3) If 1(cid:100) i (cid:100) Length(File)+1: Writes a sequence of Data to a
—throws BadPosition file, starting at item i, extending the file if necessary.
Create() (cid:111) FileId Creates a new file of length 0 and delivers a UFID for it.
Delete(FileId) Removes the file from the file store.
GetAttributes(FileId) (cid:111) Attr Returns the file attributes for the file.
SetAttributes(FileId, Attr) Sets the file attributes (only those attributes that are not
shaded in Figure 12.3).
into Data, which is then returned to the client. The Write operation copies the sequence
of data items in Data into the specified file beginning at item i, replacing the previous
contents of the file at the corresponding position and extending the file if necessary.
Create creates a new, empty file and returns the UFID that is generated. Delete
removes the specified file.
GetAttributes and SetAttributes enable clients to access the attribute record.
GetAttributes is normally available to any client that is allowed to read the file. Access
to the SetAttributes operation would normally be restricted to the directory service that
provides access to the file. The values of the length and timestamp portions of the
attribute record are not affected by SetAttributes; they are maintained separately by the
flat file service itself.
ComparisonwithUNIX: Our interface and the UNIX file system primitives are
functionally equivalent. It is a simple matter to construct a client module that emulates
the UNIX system calls in terms of our flat file service and the directory service
operations described in the next section.
In comparison with the UNIX interface,our flat file service has no open and close
operations – files can be accessed immediately by quoting the appropriate UFID. The
Read and Write requests in our interface include a parameter specifying a starting point
within the file for each transfer, whereas the equivalent UNIX operations do not. In
UNIX, each read or write operation starts at the current position of the read-write
pointer, and the read-write pointer is advanced by the number of bytes transferred after
eachread or write. A seek operation is provided to enable the read-write pointer to be
explicitly repositioned.
The interface to our flat file service differs from the UNIX file system interface
mainly for reasons of fault tolerance:
Repeatableoperations:With the exception of Create, the operations are
idempotent, allowing the use of at-least-once RPC semantics – clients may repeat
calls to which they receive no reply. Repeated execution of Create produces a
different new file for each call.


===== page 551 =====
SECTION 12.2 FILE SERVICE ARCHITECTURE 533
Statelessservers:The interface is suitable for implementation by stateless servers.
Stateless servers can be restarted after a failure and resume operation without any
need for clients or the server to restore any state.
The UNIX file operations are neither idempotent nor consistent with the requirement for
a stateless implementation. A read-write pointer is generated by the UNIX file system
whenever a file is opened, and it is retained, together with the results of access-control
checks, until the file is closed. The UNIX read and write operations are not idempotent;
if an operation is accidentally repeated, the automatic advance of the read-write pointer
results in access to a different portion of the file in the repeated operation. The read-write
pointer is a hidden, client-related state variable. To mimic it in a file server, open and
close operations would be needed, and the read-write pointer’s value would have to be
retained by the server as long as the relevant file is open. By eliminating the read-write
pointer, we have eliminated most of the need for the file server to retain state
information on behalf of specific clients.
Access control • In the UNIX file system, the user’s access rights are checked against
the access mode (read or write) requested in the open call (Figure 12.4 shows the UNIX
file system API) and the file is opened only if the user has the necessary rights. The user
identity (UID) used in the access rights check is retrieved during the user’s earlier
authenticated login and cannot be tampered with in non-distributed implementations.
The resulting access rights are retained until the file is closed, and no further checks are
required when subsequent operations on the same file are requested.
In distributed implementations, access rights checks have to be performed at the
server because the server RPC interface is an otherwise unprotected point of access to
files. A user identity has to be passed with requests, and the server is vulnerable to
forged identities. Furthermore, if the results of an access rights check were retained at
the server and used for future accesses, the server would no longer be stateless. Two
alternative approaches to the latter problem can be adopted:
(cid:129) An access check is made whenever a file name is converted to a UFID, and the
results are encoded in the form of a capability (see Section 11.2.4), which is
returned to the client for submission with subsequent requests.
(cid:129) A user identity is submitted with every client request, and access checks are
performed by the server for every file operation.
Both methods enable stateless server implementation, and both have been used in
distributed file systems. The second is more common; it is used in both NFS and AFS.
Neither of these approaches overcomes the security problem concerning forged user
identities, but we saw in Chapter 11 that this can be addressed by the use of digital
signatures. Kerberos is an effective authentication scheme that has been applied to both
NFS and AFS.
In our abstract model, we make no assumption about the method by which access
control is implemented. The user identity is passed as an implicit parameter and can be
used whenever it is needed.
Directory service interface • Figure 12.7 contains a definition of the RPC interface to a
directory service. The primary purpose of the directory service is to provide a service for
translating text names to UFIDs. In order to do so, it maintains directory files containing


===== page 552 =====
534 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.7 Directory service operations
Lookup(Dir, Name) (cid:111) FileId Locates the text name in the directory and returns the
—throws NotFound relevant UFID. If Name is not in the directory, throws an
exception.
AddName(Dir, Name, FileId) (cid:3) If Name is not in the directory, adds (Name, File) to the
—throws NameDuplicate directory and updates the file’s attribute record.(cid:3)
If Name is already in the directory, throws an exception.
UnName(Dir, Name) (cid:3) If Name is in the directory, removes the entry containing
—throws NotFound Name from the directory. (cid:3)
If Name is not in the directory, throws an exception.
GetNames(Dir, Pattern) (cid:111) NameSeq Returns all the text names in the directory that match the
regular expression Pattern.
the mappings between text names for files and UFIDs. Each directory is stored as a
conventional file with a UFID, so the directory service is a client of the file service.
We define only operations on individual directories. For each operation, a UFID
for the file containing the directory is required (in the Dir parameter). The Lookup
operation in the basic directory service performs a single Name(cid:111)UFID translation. It
is a building block for use in other services or in the client module to perform more
complex translations, such as the hierarchic name interpretation found in UNIX. As
before, exceptions caused by inadequate access rights are omitted from the definitions.
There are two operations for altering directories: AddName and UnName.
AddName adds an entry to a directory and increments the reference count field in the
file’s attribute record.
UnName removes an entry from a directory and decrements the reference count.
If this causes the reference count to reach zero, the file is removed. GetNames is
provided to enable clients to examine the contents of directories and to implement
pattern-matching operations on file names such as those found in the UNIX shell. It
returns all or a subset of the names stored in a given directory. The names are selected
by pattern matching against a regular expression supplied by the client.
The provision of pattern matching in the GetNames operation enables users to
determine the names of one or more files by giving an incomplete specification of the
characters in the names. A regular expression is a specification for a class of strings in
the form of an expression containing a combination of literal substrings and symbols
denoting variable characters or repeated occurrences of characters or substrings.
Hierarchicfilesystem • A hierarchic file system such as the one that UNIX provides
consists of a number of directories arranged in a tree structure. Each directory holds the
names of the files and other directories that are accessible from it. Any file or directory
can be referenced using a pathname – a multi-part name that represents a path through


===== page 553 =====
SECTION 12.2 FILE SERVICE ARCHITECTURE 535
the tree. The root has a distinguished name, and each file or directory has a name in a
directory. The UNIX file-naming scheme is not a strict hierarchy – files can have several
names, and they can be in the same or different directories. This is implemented by a
link operation, which adds a new name for a file to a specified directory.
A UNIX-like file-naming system can be implemented by the client module using
the flat file and directory services that we have defined. A tree-structured network of
directories is constructed with files at the leaves and directories at the other nodes of the
tree. The root of the tree is a directory with a ‘well-known’ UFID. Multiple names for
files can be supported using the AddName operation and the reference count field in the
attribute record.
A function can be provided in the client module that gets the UFID of a file given
its pathname. The function interprets the pathname starting from the root, using Lookup
to obtain the UFID of each directory in the path.
In a hierarchic directory service, the file attributes associated with files should
include a type field that distinguishes between ordinary files and directories. This is used
when following a path to ensure that each part of the name, except the last, refers to a
directory.
File groups • Afile group is a collection of files located on a given server. A server may
hold several file groups, and groups can be moved between servers, but a file cannot
change the group to which it belongs. A similar construct called a filesystem is used in
UNIX and in most other operating systems. (Terminology note: the single word
filesystem refers to the set of files held in a storage device or partition, whereas the words
file system refer to a software component that provides access to files.) File groups were
originally introduced to support facilities for moving collections of files stored on
removable media between computers. In a distributed file service, file groups support
the allocation of files to file servers in larger logical units and enable the service to be
implemented with files stored on several servers. In a distributed file system that
supports file groups, the representation of UFIDs includes a file group identifier
component, enabling the client module in each client computer to take responsibility for
dispatching requests to the server that holds the relevant file group.
File group identifiers must be unique throughout a distributed system. Since file
groups can be moved and distributed systems that are initially separate can be merged
to form a single system, the only way to ensure that file group identifiers will always be
distinct in a given system is to generate them with an algorithm that ensures global
uniqueness. For example, whenever a new file group is created, a unique identifier can
be generated by concatenating the 32-bit IP address of the host creating the new group
with a 16-bit integer derived from the date, producing a unique 48-bit integer:
32 bits 16 bits
file group identifier: IP address date
Note that the IP address cannot be used for the purpose of locating the file group, since
it may be moved to another server. Instead, a mapping between group identifiers and
servers should be maintained by the file service.


===== page 554 =====
536 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.8 NFS architecture
Client computer Server computer
Application Application
program program
UNIX
system calls
UNIX kernel
UNIX kernel Virtual file system
Local Remote
UNIX UNIX
NFS NFS
file file
client server
system system
NFS
protocol
12.3 Case study: Sun Network File System
Figure 12.8
rehtO
metsys
elif
Virtual file system
shows the architecture of Sun NFS. It follows the abstract model defined in
the preceding section. All implementationsof NFS support the NFS protocol – a set of
remote procedure calls that provide the means for clients to perform operations on a
remote file store. The NFS protocol is operating system–independent but was originally
developed for use in networks of UNIX systems, and we shall describe the UNIX
implementation the NFS protocol (version 3).
TheNFS servermodule resides in the kernel on each computer that acts as an NFS
server. Requests referring to files in a remote file system are translated by the client
module to NFS protocol operations and then passed to the NFS server module at the
computer holding the relevant file system.
The NFS client and server modules communicate using remote procedure calls.
Sun’s RPC system, described in Section 5.3.3, was developed for use in NFS. It can be
configured to use either UDP or TCP, and the NFS protocol is compatible with both. A
port mapper service is included to enable clients to bind to services in a given host by
name. The RPC interface to the NFS server is open: any process can send requests to an
NFS server; if the requests are valid and they include valid user credentials, they will be
acted upon. The submission of signed user credentials can be required as an optional
security feature, as can the encryption of data for privacy and integrity.
Virtualfilesystem • Figure 12.8 makes it clear that NFS provides access transparency:
user programs can issue file operations for local or remote files without distinction.
Other distributed file systems may be present that support UNIX system calls, and if so,
they could be integrated in the same way.


===== page 555 =====
SECTION 12.3 CASE STUDY: SUN NETWORK FILE SYSTEM 537
The integration is achieved by a virtual file system (VFS) module, which has been
added to the UNIX kernel to distinguish between local and remote files and to translate
between the UNIX-independent file identifiers used by NFS and the internal file
identifiers normally used in UNIX and other file systems. In addition, VFS keeps track
of the filesystems that are currently available both locally and remotely, and it passes
each request to the appropriate local system module (the UNIX file system, the NFS
client module or the service module for another file system).
The file identifiers used in NFS are called file handles. A file handle is opaque to
clients and contains whatever information the server needs to distinguish an individual
file. In UNIX implementations of NFS, the file handle is derived from the file’s i-node
number by adding two extra fields as follows (the i-node number of a UNIX file is a
number that serves to identify and locate the file within the file system in which the file
is stored):
File handle: Filesystem identifier i-node number i-node generation
of file number
NFS adopts the UNIX mountable filesystem as the unit of file grouping defined in the
preceding section. The filesystem identifier field is a unique number that is allocated to
each filesystem when it is created (and in the UNIX implementation is stored in the
superblock of the file system). The i-node generation number is needed because in the
conventional UNIX file system i-node numbers are reused after a file is removed. In the
VFS extensions to the UNIX file system, a generation number is stored with each file
and is incremented each time the i-node number is reused (for example, in a UNIX creat
system call). The client obtains the first file handle for a remote file system when it
mounts it. File handles are passed from server to client in the results of lookup,create
andmkdir operations (see Figure 12.9) and from client to server in the argument lists of
all server operations.
The virtual file system layer has one VFSstructure for each mounted file system
and one v-node per open file. A VFS structure relates a remote file system to the local
directory on which it is mounted. The v-node contains an indicator to show whether a
file is local or remote. If the file is local, the v-node contains a reference to the index of
the local file (an i-node in a UNIX implementation). If the file is remote, it contains the
file handle of the remote file.
Clientintegration • The NFS client module plays the role described for the client
module in our architectural model, supplying an interface suitable for use by
conventional application programs. But unlike our model client module, it emulates the
semantics of the standard UNIX file system primitives precisely and is integrated with
the UNIX kernel. It is integrated with the kernel and not supplied as a library for loading
into client processes so that:
(cid:129) user programs can access files via UNIX system calls without recompilation or
reloading;
(cid:129) a single client module serves all of the user-level processes, with a shared cache
of recently used blocks (described below);


===== page 556 =====
538 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.9 NFS server operations (NFS version 3 protocol, simplified)
lookup(dirfh, name) (cid:111) fh, attr Returns file handle and attributes for the file name in the directory dirfh.
create(dirfh, name, attr) (cid:111)(cid:3) Creates a new file name in directory dirfh with attributes attr and returns
newfh, attr the new file handle and attributes.
remove(dirfh, name) (cid:111) status Removes file name from directory dirfh.
getattr(fh) (cid:111) attr Returns file attributes of file fh. (Similar to the UNIX stat system call.)
setattr(fh, attr) (cid:111) attr Sets the attributes (mode, user ID, group ID, size, access time and
modify time of a file). Setting the size to 0 truncates the file.
read(fh, offset, count) (cid:111) attr, data Returns up to count bytes of data from a file starting at offset. Also
returns the latest attributes of the file.
write(fh, offset, count, data) (cid:111) attr Writes count bytes of data to a file starting at offset. Returns the
attributes of the file after the write has taken place.
rename(dirfh, name, todirfh, Changes the name of file name in directory dirfh to toname in directory
toname)(cid:111) status todirfh.
link(newdirfh, newname, fh) (cid:3) Creates an entry newname in the directory newdirfh that refers to the file
(cid:111) status or directory fh.
symlink(newdirfh, newname, string) Creates an entry newname in the directory newdirfh of type symbolic
(cid:111) status link with the value string. The server does not interpret the string but
makes a symbolic link file to hold it.
readlink(fh) (cid:111) string Returns the string that is associated with the symbolic link file identified
by fh.
mkdir(dirfh, name, attr) (cid:111) newfh, Creates a new directory name with attributes attr and returns the new
attr file handle and attributes.
rmdir(dirfh, name) (cid:111) status Removes the empty directory name from the parent directory dirfh.
Fails if the directory is not empty.
readdir(dirfh, cookie, count) (cid:111) Returns up to count bytes of directory entries from the directory dirfh.
entries Each entry contains a file name, a file handle and an opaque pointer to
the next directory entry, called a cookie. The cookie is used in
subsequent readdir calls to start reading from the following entry. If the
value of cookie is 0, reads from the first entry in the directory.
statfs(fh) (cid:111) fsstats Returns file system information (such as block size, number of free
blocks and so on) for the file system containing a file fh.
(cid:129) the encryption key used to authenticate user IDs passed to the server (see below)
can be retained in the kernel, preventing impersonation by user-level clients.
The NFS client module cooperates with the virtual file system in each client machine. It
operates in a similar manner to the conventional UNIX file system, transferring blocks
of files to and from the server and caching the blocks in the local memory whenever
possible. It shares the same buffer cache that is used by the local input-output system.


===== page 557 =====
SECTION 12.3 CASE STUDY: SUN NETWORK FILE SYSTEM 539
But since several clients in different host machines may simultaneously access the same
remote file, a new and significant cache consistency problem arises.
Accesscontrolandauthentication • Unlike the conventional UNIX file system, the NFS
server is stateless and does not keep files open on behalf of its clients. So the server must
check the user’s identity against the file’s access permission attributes afresh on each
request, to see whether the user is permitted to access the file in the manner requested.
The Sun RPC protocol requires clients to send user authentication information (for
example, the conventional UNIX 16-bit user ID and group ID) with each request and this
is checked against the access permission in the file attributes. These additional
parameters are not shown in our overview of the NFS protocol in Figure 12.9; they are
supplied automatically by the RPC system.
In its simplest form, there is a security loophole in this access-control mechanism.
An NFS server provides a conventional RPC interface at a well-known port on each host
and any process can behave as a client, sending requests to the server to access or update
a file. The client can modify the RPC calls to include the user ID of any user,
impersonating the user without their knowledge or permission. This security loophole
has been closed by the use of an option in the RPC protocol for the DES encryption of
the user’s authentication information. More recently, Kerberos has been integrated with
Sun NFS to provide a stronger and more comprehensive solution to the problems of user
authentication and security; we describe this below.
NFS server interface • A simplified representation of the RPC interface provided by
NFS version 3 servers (defined in RFC 1813 [Callaghan et al. 1995]) is shown in Figure
12.9. The NFS file access operations read,write,getattr and setattr are almost identical
to the Read, Write, GetAttributes and SetAttributes operations defined for our flat file
service model (Figure 12.6). The lookup operation and most of the other directory
operations defined in Figure 12.9 are similar to those in our directory service model
(Figure 12.7).
The file and directory operations are integrated in a single service; the creation and
insertion of file names in directories is performed by a single create operation, which
takes the text name of the new file and the file handle for the target directory as
arguments. The other NFS operations on directories are create, remove, rename, link,
symlink, readlink, mkdir, rmdir, readdir and statfs. They resemble their UNIX
counterparts with the exception of readdir, which provides a representation-
independent method for reading the contents of directories, and statfs, which gives the
status information on remote file systems.
Mountservice • The mounting of subtrees of remote filesystems by clients is supported
by a separate mount service process that runs at user level on each NFS server computer.
On each server, there is a file with a well-known name (/etc/exports) containing the
names of local filesystems that are available for remote mounting. An access list is
associated with each filesystem name indicating which hosts are permitted to mount the
filesystem.
Clients use a modified version of the UNIX mount command to request mounting
of a remote filesystem, specifying the remote host’s name, the pathname of a directory
in the remote filesystem and the local name with which it is to be mounted. The remote
directory may be any subtree of the required remote filesystem, enabling clients to
mount any part of the remote filesystem. The modified mount command communicates


===== page 558 =====
540 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.10 Local and remote filesystems accessible on an NFS client
Server 1 Client Server 2
(root) (root) (root)
export . . . vmunix usr nfs
Remote Remote
people students x staff users
mount mount
big jon bob . . . jimann jane joe
Note: The file system mounted at /usr/students in the client is actually the subtree located
at/export/people in Server 1; the filesystem mounted at /usr/staff in the client is
actually the subtree located at /nfs/users in Server 2.
with the mount service process on the remote host using a mount protocol. This is an
RPC protocol and includes an operation that takes a directory pathname and returns the
file handle of the specified directory if the client has access permission for the relevant
filesystem. The location (IP address and port number) of the server and the file handle
for the remote directory are passed on to the VFS layer and the NFS client.
Figure 12.10 illustrates a Client with two remotely mounted file stores. The nodes
people and users in filesystems at Server 1 and Server 2 are mounted over nodes students
and staff in Client’s local file store. The meaning of this is that programs running at
Client can access files at Server1 and Server2 by using pathnames such as
/usr/students/jon and /usr/staff/ann.
Remote filesystems may be hard-mounted or soft-mounted in a client computer.
When a user-level process accesses a file in a filesystem that is hard-mounted, the
process is suspended until the request can be completed, and if the remote host is
unavailable for any reason the NFS client module continues to retry the request until it
is satisfied. Thus in the case of a server failure, user-level processes are suspended until
the server restarts and then they continue just as though there had been no failure. But if
the relevant filesystem is soft-mounted, the NFS client module returns a failure
indication to user-level processes after a small number of retries. Properly constructed
programs will then detect the failure and take appropriate recovery or reporting actions.
But many UNIX utilities and applications do not test for the failure of file access
operations, and these behave in unpredictable ways in the case of failure of a soft-
mounted filesystem. For this reason, many installations use hard mounting exclusively,
with the consequence that programs are unable to recover gracefully when an NFS
server is unavailable for a significant period.
Pathnametranslation • UNIX file systems translate multi-part file pathnames to i-node
references in a step-by-step process whenever the open, creat or stat system calls are
used. In NFS, pathnames cannot be translated at a server, because the name may cross a


===== page 559 =====
SECTION 12.3 CASE STUDY: SUN NETWORK FILE SYSTEM 541
‘mount point’ at the client – directories holding different parts of a multi-part name may
reside in filesystems at different servers. So pathnames are parsed, and their translation
is performed in an iterative manner by the client. Each part of a name that refers to a
remote-mounted directory is translated to a file handle using a separate lookup request
to the remote server.
Thelookup operation looks for a single part of a pathname in a given directory and
returns the corresponding file handle and file attributes. The file handle returned in the
previous step is used as a parameter in the next lookup step. Since file handles are
opaque to NFS client code, the virtual file system is responsible for resolving file
handles to a local or a remote directory and performing the necessary indirection when
it references a local mount point. Caching of the results of each step in pathname
translations alleviates the apparent inefficiency of this process, taking advantage of
locality of reference to files and directories; users and programs typically access files in
only one or a small number of directories.
Automounter • The automounter was added to the UNIX implementation of NFS in
order to mount a remote directory dynamically whenever an ‘empty’ mount point is
referenced by a client. The original implementation of the automounter ran as a user-
level UNIX process in each client computer. Later versions (called autofs) were
implemented in the kernel for Solaris and Linux. We describe the original version here.
The automounter maintains a table of mount points (pathnames) with a reference
to one or more NFS servers listed against each. It behaves like a local NFS server at the
client machine. When the NFS client module attempts to resolve a pathname that
includes one of these mount points, it passes to the local automounter a lookup() request
that locates the required filesystem in its table and sends a ‘probe’ request to each server
listed. The filesystem on the first server to respond is then mounted at the client using
the normal mount service. The mounted filesystem is linked to the mount point using a
symbolic link, so that accesses to it will not result in further requests to the automounter.
File access then proceeds in the normal way without further reference to the
automounter unless there are no references to the symbolic link for several minutes. In
the latter case, the automounter unmounts the remote filesystem.
The later kernel implementations replaced the symbolic links with real mounts,
avoiding some problems that arose with applications that cached the temporary
pathnames used in user-level automounters [Callaghan 1999].
A simple form of read-only replication can be achieved by listing several servers
containing identical copies of a filesystem or file subtree against a name in the
automounter table. This is useful for heavily used file systems that change infrequently,
such as UNIX system binaries. For example, copies of the /usr/lib directory and its
subtree might be held on more than one server. On the first occasion that a file in /usr/lib
is opened at a client, all of the servers will be sent probe messages, and the first to
respond will be mounted at the client. This provides a limited degree of fault tolerance
and load balancing, since the first server to respond will be one that has not failed and is
likely to be one that is not heavily occupied with servicing other requests.
Servercaching • Caching in both the client and the server computer are indispensable
features of NFS implementations in order to achieve adequate performance.
In conventional UNIX systems, file pages, directories and file attributes that have
been read from disk are retained in a main memory buffer cache until the buffer space


===== page 560 =====
542 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
is required for other pages. If a process then issues a read or a write request for a page
that is already in the cache, it can be satisfied without another disk access. Read-ahead
anticipates read accesses and fetches the pages following those that have most recently
been read, and delayed-write optimizes writes: when a page has been altered (by a write
request), its new contents are written to disk only when the buffer page is required for
another page. To guard against loss of data in a system crash, the UNIX sync operation
flushes altered pages to disk every 30 seconds. These caching techniques work in a
conventional UNIX environment because all read and write requests issued by user-
level processes pass through a single cache that is implemented in the UNIX kernel
space. The cache is always kept up-to-date, and file accesses cannot bypass the cache.
NFS servers use the cache at the server machine just as it is used for other file
accesses. The use of the server’s cache to hold recently read disk blocks does not raise
any consistency problems; but when a server performs write operations, extra measures
are needed to ensure that clients can be confident that the results of the write operations
are persistent, even when server crashes occur. In version 3 of the NFS protocol, the
write operation offers two options for this (not shown in Figure 12.9):
1. Data in write operations received from clients is stored in the memory cache at the
serverand written to disk before a reply is sent to the client. This is called write-
through caching. The client can be sure that the data is stored persistently as soon
as the reply has been received.
2. Data in write operations is stored only in the memory cache. It will be written to
disk when a commit operation is received for the relevant file. The client can be
sure that the data is persistently stored only when a reply to a commit operation for
the relevant file has been received. Standard NFS clients use this mode of
operation, issuing a commit whenever a file that was open for writing is closed.
Commit is an additional operation provided in version 3 of the NFS protocol; it was
added to overcome a performance bottleneck caused by the write-through mode of
operation in servers that receive large numbers of write operations.
The requirement for write-through in distributed file systems is an instance of the
independent failure modes discussed in Chapter 1 – clients continue to operate when a
server fails, and application programs may take actions on the assumption that the
results of previous writes are committed to disk storage. This is unlikely to occur in the
case of local file updates, because the failure of a local file system is almost certain to
result in the failure of all the application processes running on the same computer.
Clientcaching • The NFS client module caches the results of read, write, getattr,
lookup and readdir operations in order to reduce the number of requests transmitted to
servers. Client caching introduces the potential for different versions of files or portions
of files to exist in different client nodes, because writes by a client do not result in the
immediate updating of cached copies of the same file in other clients. Instead, clients are
responsible for polling the server to check the currency of the cached data that they hold.
A timestamp-based method is used to validate cached blocks before they are used.
Each data or metadata item in the cache is tagged with two timestamps:
Tc is the time when the cache entry was last validated.
Tm is the time when the block was last modified at the server.


===== page 561 =====
SECTION 12.3 CASE STUDY: SUN NETWORK FILE SYSTEM 543
A cache entry is valid at time T if T – Tc is less than a freshness interval t, or if the value
for Tm recorded at the client matches the value of Tm at the server (that is, the data has
not been modified at the server since the cache entry was made). Formally, the validity
condition is:
(cid:11)T–Tc(cid:31)t(cid:12)(cid:155)(cid:11)Tm = Tm (cid:12)
client server
The selection of a value for t involves a compromise between consistency and efficiency.
A very short freshness interval will result in a close approximation to one-copy
consistency, at the cost of a relatively heavy load of calls to the server to check the value
ofTm server. In Sun Solaris clients, t is set adaptively for individual files to a value in the
range 3 to 30 seconds, depending on the frequency of updates to the file. For directories
the range is 30 to 60 seconds, reflecting the lower risk of concurrent updates.
There is one value of Tm server for all the data blocks in a file and another for the
file attributes. Since NFS clients cannot determine whether a file is being shared or not,
the validation procedure must be used for all file accesses. A validity check is performed
whenever a cache entry is used. The first half of the validity condition can be evaluated
without access to the server. If it is true, then the second half need not be evaluated; if it
is false, the current value of Tm server is obtained (by means of a getattr call to the server)
and compared with the local value Tm client. If they are the same, then the cache entry is
taken to be valid and the value of T c for that cache entry is updated to the current time.
If they differ, then the cached data has been updated at the server and the cache entry is
invalidated, resulting in a request to the server for the relevant data.
Several measures are used to reduce the traffic of getattr calls to the server:
(cid:129) Whenever a new value of Tm server is received at a client, it is applied to all cache
entries derived from the relevant file.
(cid:129) The current attribute values are sent ‘piggybacked’ with the results of every
operation on a file, and if the value of Tm server has changed the client uses it to
update the cache entries relating to the file.
(cid:129) The adaptive algorithm forsetting freshness interval t outlined above reduces the
traffic considerably for most files.
The validation procedure does not guarantee the same level of consistency of files that
is provided in conventional UNIX systems, since recent updates are not always visible
to clients sharing a file. There are two sources of time lag; the delay after a write before
the updated data leaves the cache in the updating client’s kernel and the three-second
‘window’ for cache validation. Fortunately, most UNIX applications do not depend
critically upon the synchronization of file updates, and few difficulties have been
reported from this source.
Writes are handled differently. When a cached page is modified it is marked as
‘dirty’ and is scheduled to be flushed to the server asynchronously. Modified pages are
flushed when the file is closed or a sync occurs at the client, and they are flushed more
frequently if bio-daemons are in use (see below). This does not provide the same
persistence guarantee as the server cache, but it emulates the behaviour for local writes.
To implement read-ahead and delayed-write, the NFS client needs to perform
some reads and writes asynchronously. This is achieved in UNIX implementations of


===== page 562 =====
544 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
NFS by the inclusion of one or more bio–daemon processes at each client. (Bio stands
for block input-output; the term daemon is often used to refer to user-level processes that
perform system tasks.) The role of the bio-daemons is to perform read-ahead and
delayed-write operations. A bio-daemon is notified after each read request, and it
requests the transfer of the following file block from the server to the client cache. In the
case of writing, the bio-daemon will send a block to the server whenever a block has
been filled by a client operation. Directory blocks are sent whenever a modification has
occurred.
Bio-daemon processes improve performance, ensuring that the client module does
not block waiting for reads to return or writes to commit at the server. They are not a
logical requirement, since in the absence of read-ahead, a read operation in a user
process will trigger a synchronous request to the relevant server, and the results of writes
in user processes will be transferred to the server when the relevant file is closed or when
the virtual file system at the client performs a sync operation.
Otheroptimizations • The Sun file system is based on the UNIX BSD Fast File System
which uses 8-kbyte disk blocks, resulting in fewer file system calls for sequential file
access than previous UNIX systems. The UDP packets used for the implementation of
Sun RPC are extended to 9 kilobytes, enabling an RPC call containing an entire block
as an argument to be transferred in a single packet and minimizing the effect of network
latency when reading files sequentially. In NFS version 3, there is no limit on the
maximum size of file blocks that can be handled in read and write operations; clients
and servers can negotiate sizes larger than 8 kbytes if both are able to handle them.
As mentioned above, the file status information cached at clients must be updated
at least every three seconds for active files. To reduce the consequential server load
resulting from getattr requests, all operations that refer to files or directories are taken
as implicit getattr requests, and the current attribute values are ‘piggybacked’ along with
the other results of the operation.
Securing NFSwithKerberos • In Section 11.6.2 we described the Kerberos
authentication system developed at MIT, which has become an industry standard for
securing intranet servers against unauthorized access and imposter attacks. The security
of NFS implementations has been strengthened by the use of the Kerberos scheme to
authenticate clients. In this subsection, we describe the ‘Kerberization’ of NFS as
carried out by the designers of Kerberos.
In the original standard implementation of NFS, the user’s identity is included in
each request in the form of an unencrypted numeric identifier. (The identifier can be
encrypted in later versions of NFS.) NFS does not take any further steps to check the
authenticity of the identifier supplied. This implies a high degree of trust in the integrity
of the client computer and its software by NFS, whereas the aim of Kerberos and other
authentication-based security systems is to reduce to a minimum the range of
components in which trust is assumed. Essentially, when NFS is used in a ‘Kerberized’
environment it should accept requests only from clients whose identity can be shown to
have been authenticated by Kerberos.
One obvious solution considered by the Kerberos developers was to change the
nature of the credentials required by NFS to be a full-blown Kerberos ticket and
authenticator. But because NFS is implemented as a stateless server, each individual file
access request is handled on its face value and the authentication data would have to be


===== page 563 =====
SECTION 12.3 CASE STUDY: SUN NETWORK FILE SYSTEM 545
included in each request. This was considered unacceptably expensive in terms of the
time required to perform the necessary encryptions and because it would have entailed
adding the Kerberos client library to the kernel of all workstations.
Instead, a hybrid approach was adopted in which the NFS mount server is supplied
with full Kerberos authentication data for the users when their home and root
filesystems are mounted. The results of this authentication, including the user’s
conventional numerical identifier and the address of the client computer, are retained by
the server with the mount information for each filesystem. (Although the NFS server
does not retain state relating to individual client processes, it does retain the current
mounts at each client computer.)
On each file access request, the NFS server checks the user identifier and the
sender’s address and grants access only if they match those stored at the server for the
relevant client at mount time. This hybrid approach involves only minimal additional
cost and is safe against most forms of attack, provided that only one user at a time can
log in to each client computer. At MIT, the system is configured so that this is the case.
Recent NFS implementations include Kerberos authentication as one of several options
for authentication, and sites that also run Kerberos servers are advised to use this option.
Performance • Early performance figures reported by Sandberg [1987] showed that the
use of NFS did not normally impose a performance penalty in comparison with access
to files stored on local disks. He identified two remaining problem areas:
(cid:129) frequent use of the getattr call in order to fetch timestamps from servers for cache
validation;
(cid:129) relatively poor performance of the write operation because write-through was
used at the server.
He noted that writes are relatively infrequent in typical UNIX workloads (about 5% of
all calls to the server), and the cost of write-through is therefore tolerable except when
large files are written to the server. Further, the version of NFS that he tested did not
include the commit mechanism outlined above, which has resulted in a substantial
improvement in write performance in current versions. His results also show that the
lookup operation accounts for almost 50% of server calls. This is a consequence of the
step-by-step pathname translation method necessitated by UNIX’s file-naming
semantics.
Measurements are taken regularly by Sun and other NFS implementors using an
updated version of an exhaustive set of benchmark programs known as LADDIS [Keith
and Wittle 1993]. Current and past results are available at the SPEC web site
[www.spec.org]. Performance is summarized there for NFS server implementations
from many vendors and different hardware configurations. Single-CPU
implementations based on PC hardware but with dedicated operating systems achieve
throughputs in excess of 12,000 server operations per second and large multi-processor
configurations with many disks and controllers have achieved throughputs of up to
300,000 server operations per second. These figures indicate that NFS offers a very
effective solution to distributed storage needs in intranets of most sizes and types of use,
ranging for example from a traditional UNIX load of development by several hundred
software engineers to a battery of web servers serving material from an NFS server.


===== page 564 =====
546 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
NFS summary • Sun NFS closely follows our abstract model. The resulting design
provides good location and access transparency if the NFS mount service is used
properly to produce similar name spaces at all clients. NFS supports heterogeneous
hardware and operating systems. The NFS server implementation is stateless, enabling
clients and servers to resume execution after a failure without the need for any recovery
procedures. Migration of files or filesystems is not supported, except at the level of
manual intervention to reconfigure mount directives after the movement of a filesystem
to a new location.
The performance of NFS is much enhanced by the caching of file blocks at each
client computer. This is important for the achievement of satisfactory performance but
results in some deviation from strict UNIX one-copy file update semantics.
The other design goals of NFS and the extent to which they have been achieved are
discussed below.
Accesstransparency: The NFS client module provides an application programming
interface to local processes that is identical to the local operating system’s interface.
Thus in a UNIX client, accesses to remote files are performed using the normal UNIX
system calls. No modifications to existing programs are required to enable them to
operate correctly with remote files.
Locationtransparency: Each client establishes a file name space by adding mounted
directories in remote filesystems to its local name space. File systems have to be
exported by the node that holds them and remote-mounted by a client before they can
be accessed by processes running in the client (see Figure 12.10). The point in a
client’s name hierarchy at which a remote-mounted file system appears is determined
by the client; NFS does not enforce a single network-wide file name space – each
client sees a set of remote filesystems that is determined locally, and remote files may
have different pathnames on different clients, but a uniform name space can be
established with appropriate configuration tables in each client, achieving the goal of
location transparency.
Mobility transparency: Filesystems (in the UNIX sense, that is, subtrees of files)
may be moved between servers, but the remote mount tables in each client must then
be updated separately to enable the clients to access the filesystems in their new
locations, thus migration transparency is not fully achieved by NFS.
Scalability: The published performance figures show that NFS servers can be built
to handle very large real-world loads in an efficient and cost-effective manner. The
performance of a single server can be increased by the addition of processors, disks
and controllers. When the limits of that process are reached, additional servers must
be installed and the filesystems must be reallocated between them. The effectiveness
of that strategy is limited by the existence of ‘hot spot’ files – single files that are
accessed so frequently that the server reaches a performance limit. When loads
exceed the maximum performance available with that strategy, a distributed file
system that supports replication of updatable files (such as Coda, described in
Chapter 18), or one such as AFS that reduces the protocol traffic by the caching of
whole files, may offer a better solution. We discuss other approaches to scalability in
Section12.5.


===== page 565 =====
SECTION 12.3 CASE STUDY: SUN NETWORK FILE SYSTEM 547
File replication: Read-only file stores can be replicated on several NFS servers, but
NFS does not support file replication with updates. The Sun Network Information
Service (NIS) is a separate service available for use with NFS that supports the
replication of simple databases organized as key-value pairs (for example, the UNIX
system files /etc/passwd and /etc/hosts). It manages the distribution of updates and
accesses to the replicated files based on a simple master–slave replication model
(also known as the primary copy model, discussed further in Chapter 18) with
provision for the replication of part or all of the database at each site. NIS provides a
shared repository for system information that changes infrequently and does not
require updates to occur simultaneously at all sites.
Hardware and operating system heterogeneity: NFS has been implemented for
almost every known operating system and hardware platform and is supported by a
variety of filing systems.
Fault tolerance: The stateless and idempotent nature of the NFS file access protocol
ensures that the failure modes observed by clients when accessing remote files are
similar to those for local file access. When a server fails, the service that it provides
is suspended until the server is restarted, but once it has been restarted user-level
client processes proceed from the point at which the service was interrupted, unaware
of the failure (except in the case of access to soft-mounted remote file systems). In
practice, hard mounting is used in most instances, and this tends to impede
application programs handling server failures gracefully.
The failure of a client computer or a user-level process in a client has no effect
on any server that it may be using, since servers hold no state on behalf of their
clients.
Consistency: We have described the update behaviour in some detail. It provides a
close approximation to one-copy semantics and meets the needs of the vast majority
of applications, but the use of file sharing via NFS for communication or close
coordination between processes on different computers cannot be recommended.
Security: The need for security in NFS emerged with the connection of most
intranets to the Internet. The integration of Kerberos with NFS was a major step
forward. Other recent developments include the option to use a secure RPC
implementation (RPCSEC_GSS, documented in RFC 2203 [Eisler et al. 1997]) for
authentication and to ensure the privacy and security of the data transmitted with read
and write operations. Installations that have not deployed these mechanisms abound,
though, and they are insecure.
Efficiency: The measured performance of several implementations of NFS and its
widespread adoption for use in situations that generate very heavy loads are clear
indications of the efficiency with which the NFS protocol can be implemented.


===== page 566 =====
548 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
12.4 Case study: The Andrew File System
Like NFS, AFS provides transparent access to remote shared files for UNIX programs
running on workstations. Access to AFS files is via the normal UNIX file primitives,
enabling existing UNIX programs to access AFS files without modification or
recompilation. AFS is compatible with NFS. AFS servers hold ‘local’ UNIX files, but
the filing system in the servers is NFS-based, so files are referenced by NFS-style file
handles rather than i-node numbers, and the files may be remotely accessed via NFS.
AFS differs markedly from NFS in its design and implementation. The differences
are primarily attributable to the identification of scalability as the most important design
goal. AFS is designed to perform well with larger numbers of active users than other
distributed file systems. The key strategy for achieving scalability is the caching of
whole files in client nodes. AFS has two unusual design characteristics:
Whole-file serving:The entire contents of directories and files are transmitted to
client computers by AFS servers (in AFS-3, files larger than 64 kbytes are
transferred in 64-kbyte chunks).
Whole-file caching:Once a copy of a file or a chunk has been transferred to a
client computer it is stored in a cache on the local disk. The cache contains several
hundred of the files most recently used on that computer. The cache is permanent,
surviving reboots of the client computer. Local copies of files are used to satisfy
clients’ open requests in preference to remote copies whenever possible.
Scenario • Here is a simple scenario illustrating the operation of AFS:
1. When a user process in a client computer issues an open system call for a file in
the shared file space and there is not a current copy of the file in the local cache,
the server holding the file is located and is sent a request for a copy of the file.
2. The copy is stored in the local UNIX file system in the client computer. The copy
is then opened and the resulting UNIX file descriptor is returned to the client.
3. Subsequent read,write and other operations on the file by processes in the client
computer are applied to the local copy.
4. When the process in the client issues a close system call, if the local copy has been
updated its contents are sent back to the server. The server updates the file
contents and the timestamps on the file. The copy on the client’s local disk is
retained in case it is needed again by a user-level process on the same workstation.
We discuss the observed performance of AFS below, but we can make some general
observations and predictions here based on the design characteristics described above:
(cid:129) For shared files that are infrequently updated (such as those containing the code
of UNIX commands and libraries) and for files that are normally accessed by only
a single user (such as most of the files in a user’s home directory and its subtree),
locally cached copies are likely to remain valid for long periods – in the first case
because they are not updated and in the second because if they are updated, the
updated copy will be in the cache on the owner’s workstation. These classes of file
account for the overwhelming majority of file accesses.


===== page 567 =====
SECTION 12.4 CASE STUDY: THE ANDREW FILE SYSTEM 549
(cid:129) The local cache can be allocated a substantial proportion of the disk space on each
workstation – say, 100 megabytes. This is normally sufficient for the establishment
of a working set of the files used by one user. The provision of sufficient cache
storage for the establishment of a working set ensures that files in regular use on a
given workstation are normally retained in the cache until they are needed again.
(cid:129) The design strategy is based on some assumptions about average and maximum
file size and locality of reference to files in UNIX systems. These assumptions are
derived from observations of typical UNIX workloads in academic and other
environments [Satyanarayanan 1981, Ousterhout et al. 1985, Floyd 1986]. The
most important observations are:
– Files are small; most are less than 10 kilobytes in size.
– Read operations on files are much more common than writes (about six times
more common).
– Sequential access is common, and random access is rare.
– Most files are read and written by only one user. When a file is shared, it is
usually only one user who modifies it.
– Files are referenced in bursts. If a file has been referenced recently, there is a
high probability that it will be referenced again in the near future.
These observations were used to guide the design and optimization of AFS, not to
restrict the functionality seen by users.
(cid:129) AFS works best with the classes of file identified in the first point above. There is
one important type of file that does not fit into any of these classes – databases are
typically shared by many users and are often updated quite frequently. The
designers of AFS have explicitly excluded the provision of storage facilities for
databases from their design goals, stating that the constraints imposed by different
naming structures (that is, content-based access) and the need for fine-grained data
access, concurrency control and atomicity of updates make it difficult to design a
distributed database system that is also a distributed file system. They argue that
the provision of facilities for distributed databases should be addressed separately
[Satyanarayanan 1989a].
12.4.1 Implementation
The above scenario illustrates AFS’s operation but leaves many questions about its
implementation unanswered. Among the most important are:
(cid:129) How does AFS gain control when an open or close system call referring to a file
in the shared file space is issued by a client?
(cid:129) How is the server holding the required file located?
(cid:129) What space is allocated for cached files in workstations?
(cid:129) How does AFS ensure that the cached copies of files are up-to-date when files may
be updated by several clients?
We answer these questions below.


===== page 568 =====
550 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.11 Distribution of processes in the Andrew File System
Workstations Servers
UserVenus
program
Vice
UNIX kernel
UNIX kernel
Venus
User
Network
program
UNIX kernel
Vice
Venus
User
program UNIX kernel
UNIX kernel
AFS is implemented as two software components that exist as UNIX processes
called Vice and Venus.Figure 12.11 shows the distribution of Vice and Venus processes.
Vice is the name given to the server software that runs as a user-level UNIX process in
each server computer, and Venus is a user-level process that runs in each client computer
and corresponds to the client module in our abstract model.
The files available to user processes running on workstations are either local or
shared. Local files are handled as normal UNIX files. They are stored on a workstation’s
disk and are available only to local user processes. Shared files are stored on servers, and
copies of them are cached on the local disks of workstations. The name space seen by
user processes is illustrated in Figure 12.12. It is a conventional UNIX directory
hierarchy, with a specific subtree (called cmu) containing all of the shared files. This
splitting of the file name space into local and shared files leads to some loss of location
transparency, but this is hardly noticeable to users other than system administrators.
Local files are used only for temporary files (/tmp) and processes that are essential for
workstation startup. Other standard UNIX files (such as those normally found in /bin,
/lib and so on) are implemented as symbolic links from local directories to files held in
the shared space. Users’ directories are in the shared space, enabling users to access their
files from any workstation.
The UNIX kernel in each workstation and server is a modified version of BSD
UNIX. The modifications are designed to intercept open, close and some other file
system calls when they refer to files in the shared name space and pass them to the Venus
process in the client computer (illustrated in Figure 12.13). One other kernel
modification is included for performance reasons, and this is described later.
One of the file partitions on the local disk of each workstation is used as a cache,
holding the cached copies of files from the shared space. Venus manages the cache,
removing the least recently used files when a new file is acquired from a server to make


===== page 569 =====
SECTION 12.4 CASE STUDY: THE ANDREW FILE SYSTEM 551
Figure 12.12 File name space seen by clients of AFS
Local Shared
/ (root)
tmp bin . . . vmunix cmu
bin
Symbolic
links
the required space if the partition is full. The workstation cache is usually large enough
to accommodate several hundred average-sized files, rendering the workstation largely
independent of the Vice servers once a working set of the current user’s files and
frequently used system files has been cached.
AFS resembles the abstract file service model described in Section 12.2 in these
respects:
(cid:129) A flat file service is implemented by the Vice servers, and the hierarchic directory
structure required by UNIX user programs is implemented by the set of Venus
processes in the workstations.
(cid:129) Each file and directory in the shared file space is identified by a unique, 96-bit file
identifier (fid) similar to a UFID. The Venus processes translate the pathnames
issued by clients to fids.
Figure 12.13 System call interception in AFS
Workstation
User VVeennuuss
program
UNIX file Non-local file
system calls operations
UNIX kernel
UNIX file system
Local
disk


===== page 570 =====
552 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Files are grouped into volumes for ease of location and movement. Volumes are
generally smaller than the UNIX filesystems, which are the unit of file grouping in NFS.
For example, each user’s personal files are generally located in a separate volume. Other
volumes are allocated for system binaries, documentation and library code.
The representation of fids includes the volume number for the volume containing
the file (cf. the file group identifier in UFIDs), an NFS file handle identifying the file
within the volume (cf. the file number in UFIDs) and a uniquifier to ensure that file
identifiers are not reused:
32 bits 32 bits 32 bits
Volume number File handle Uniquifier
User programs use conventional UNIX pathnames to refer to files, but AFS uses fids in
the communication between the Venus and Vice processes. The Vice servers accept
requests only in terms of fids. Venus translates the pathnames supplied by clients into
fids using a step-by-step lookup to obtain the information from the file directories held
in the Vice servers.
Figure 12.14 describes the actions taken by Vice, Venus and the UNIX kernel
when a user process issues each of the system calls mentioned in our outline scenario
above. The callback promise mentioned here is a mechanism for ensuring that cached
copies of files are updated when another client closes the same file after updating it. This
mechanism is discussed in the next section.
12.4.2 Cache consistency
When Vice supplies a copy of a file to a Venus process it also provides a callback
promise – a token issued by the Vice server that is the custodian of the file, guaranteeing
that it will notify the Venus process when any other client modifies the file. Callback
promises are stored with the cached files on the workstation disks and have two states:
valid or cancelled. When a server performs a request to update a file it notifies all of the
Venus processes to which it has issued callback promises by sending a callback to each
– a callback is a remote procedure call from a server to a Venus process. When the Venus
process receives a callback, it sets the callback promise token for the relevant file to
cancelled.
Whenever Venus handles an open on behalf of a client, it checks the cache. If the
required file is found in the cache, then its token is checked. If its value is cancelled, then
a fresh copy of the file must be fetched from the Vice server, but if the token is valid,
then the cached copy can be opened and used without reference to Vice.
When a workstation is restarted after a failure or a shutdown, Venus aims to retain
as many as possible of the cached files on the local disk, but it cannot assume that the
callback promise tokens are correct, since some callbacks may have been missed. Before
the first use of each cached file or directory after a restart, Venus therefore generates a
cache validation request containing the file modification timestamp to the server that is
the custodian of the file. If the timestamp is current, the server responds with valid and
the token is reinstated. If the timestamp shows that the file is out of date, then the server
responds with cancelled and the token is set to cancelled. Callbacks must be renewed


===== page 571 =====
SECTION 12.4 CASE STUDY: THE ANDREW FILE SYSTEM 553
Figure 12.14 Implementation of file system calls in AFS
User process UNIX kernel Venus Net Vice
open(FileName, IfFileName refers to a
mode) file in shared file space,
Check list of files in
pass the request to
local cache. If not
Venus.
present or there is no
validcallback promise,
send a request for the
file to the Vice server
that is custodian of the
volume containing the Transfer a copy of the
file. file and acallback
promise to the
workstation. Log the
Place the copy of the callback promise.
file in the local file
Open the local file and system, enter its local
return the file name in the local cache
descriptor to the list and return the local
application. name to UNIX.
read(FileDescriptor, Perform a normal
Buffer, length) UNIX read operation
on the local copy.
write(FileDescriptor, Perform a normal
Buffer, length) UNIX write operation
on the local copy.
close(FileDescriptor) Close the local copy
and notify Venus that
the file has been closed. If the local copy has
been changed, send a
Replace the file
copy to the Vice server
contents and send a
that is the custodian of
callback to all other
the file.
clients holdingcallback
promises on the file.
before an open if a time T (typically on the order of a few minutes) has elapsed since the
file was cached without communication from the server. This is to deal with possible
communication failures, which can result in the loss of callback messages.
This callback-based mechanism for maintaining cache consistency was adopted as
offering the most scalable approach, following the evaluation in the prototype (AFS-1)
of a timestamp-based mechanism similar to that used in NFS. In AFS-1, a Venus process
holding a cached copy of a file interrogates the Vice process on each open to determine
whether the timestamp on the local copy agrees with that on the server. The callback-
based approach is more scalable because it results in communication between client and
server and activity in the server only when the file has been updated, whereas the
timestamp approach results in a client-server interaction on each open, even when there
is a valid local copy. Since the majority of files are not accessed concurrently, and read
operations predominate over writes in most applications, the callback mechanism
results in a dramatic reduction in the number of client-server interactions.
The callback mechanism used in AFS-2 and later versions of AFS requires Vice
servers to maintain some state on behalf of their Venus clients, unlike AFS-1, NFS and
our file service model. The client-dependent state required consists of a list of the Venus


===== page 572 =====
554 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Figure 12.15 The main components of the Vice service interface
Fetch(fid)(cid:111) attr, data Returns the attributes (status) and, optionally, the contents of
the file identified by fid and records a callback promise on it.
Store(fid, attr, data) Updates the attributes and (optionally) the contents of a
specified file.
Create()(cid:111) fid Creates a new file and records a callback promise on it.
Remove(fid) Deletes the specified file.
SetLock(fid, mode) Sets a lock on the specified file or directory. The mode of the
lock may be shared or exclusive. Locks that are not removed
expire after 30 minutes.
ReleaseLock(fid) Unlocks the specified file or directory.
RemoveCallback(fid) Informs the server that a Venus process has flushed a file from
its cache.
BreakCallback(fid) Call made by a Vice server to a Venus process; cancels the
callback promise on the relevant file.
Note: Directory and administrative operations (Rename, Link, Makedir, Removedir,GetTime,
CheckToken and so on) are not shown.
processes to which callback promises have been issued for each file. These callback lists
must be retained over server failures – they are held on the server disks and are updated
using atomic operations.
Figure 12.15 shows the RPC calls provided by AFS servers for operations on files
(that is, the interface provided by AFS servers to Venus processes).
Updatesemantics • The goal of this cache-consistency mechanism is to achieve the
best approximation to one-copy file semantics that is practicable without serious
performance degradation. A strict implementation of one-copy semantics for UNIX file
access primitives would require that the results of each write to a file be distributed to
all sites holding the file in their cache before any further accesses can occur. This is not
practicable in large-scale systems; instead, the callback promise mechanism maintains
a well-defined approximation to one-copy semantics.
For AFS-1, the update semantics can be formally stated in very simple terms. For
a client C operating on a file F whose custodian is a server S, the following guarantees
of currency for the copies of F are maintained:
after a successful open: latest(F, S)
after a failed open: failure(S)
after a successful close: updated(F, S)
after a failed close: failure(S)
wherelatest(F, S) denotes a guarantee that the current value of F at C is the same as the
value at S,failure(S) denotes that the open or close operation has not been performed at


===== page 573 =====
SECTION 12.4 CASE STUDY: THE ANDREW FILE SYSTEM 555
S (and the failure can be detected by C), and updated(F, S) denotes that C’s value of F
has been successfully propagated to S.
For AFS-2, the currency guarantee for open is slightly weaker, and the
corresponding formal statement of the guarantee is more complex. This is because a
client may open an old copy of a file after it has been updated by another client. This
occurs if a callback message is lost, for example as a result of a network failure. But
there is a maximum time, T, for which a client can remain unaware of a newer version
of a file. Hence we have the following guarantee:
after a successful open: latest(F, S, 0)(cid:3)
or(lostCallback(S, T) and inCache(F) and (cid:3)
latest(F, S, T))
where latest(F, S, T) denotes that the copy of F seen by the client is no more than T
seconds out of date, lostCallback(S, T) denotes that a callback message from S to C has
been lost at some time during the last T seconds, and inCache(F) indicates that the file
F was in the cache at C before the open operation was attempted. The above formal
statement expresses the fact that the cached copy of F at C after an open operation is the
most recent version in the system or a callback message has been lost (due to a
communication failure) and the version that was already in the cache has been used; the
cached version will be no more than T seconds out of date. (T is a system constant
representing the interval at which callback promises must be renewed. At most
installations, the value of T is about 10 minutes.)
In line with its goal – to provide a large-scale, UNIX-compatible distributed file
service – AFS does not provide any further mechanism for the control of concurrent
updates. The cache consistency algorithm described above comes into action only on
open and close operations. Once a file has been opened, the client may access and update
the local copy in any way it chooses without the knowledge of any processes on other
workstations. When the file is closed, a copy is returned to the server, replacing the
current version.
If clients in different workstations open, write and close the same file
concurrently, all but the update resulting from the last close will be silently lost (no error
report is given). Clients must implement concurrency control independently if they
require it. On the other hand, when two client processes in the same workstation open a
file, they share the same cached copy and updates are performed in the normal UNIX
fashion – block by block.
Although the update semantics differ depending on the locations of the concurrent
processes accessing a file and are not precisely the same as those provided by the
standard UNIX file system, they are sufficiently close for the vast majority of existing
UNIX programs to operate correctly.
12.4.3 Other aspects
AFS introduces several other interesting design developments and refinements that we
outline here, together with a summary of performance evaluation results:
UNIXkernelmodifications • We have noted that the Vice server is a user-level process
running in the server computer and the server host is dedicated to the provision of an


===== page 574 =====
556 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
AFS service. The UNIX kernel in AFS hosts is altered so that Vice can perform file
operations in terms of file handles instead of the conventional UNIX file descriptors.
This is the only kernel modification required by AFS, and it is necessary if Vice is not
to maintain any client state (such as file descriptors).
Locationdatabase • Each server contains a copy of a fully replicated location database
giving a mapping of volume names to servers. Temporary inaccuracies in this database
may occur when a volume is moved, but they are harmless because forwarding
information is left behind in the server from which the volume is moved.
Threads • The implementations of Vice and Venus make use of a non-preemptive
threads package to enable requests to be processed concurrently at both the client (where
several user processes may have file access requests in progress concurrently) and the
server. In the client, the tables describing the contents of the cache and the volume
database are held in memory that is shared between the Venus threads.
Read-onlyreplicas • Volumes containing files that are frequently read but rarely
modified, such as the UNIX /bin and /usr/bin directories of system commands and /man
directory of manual pages, can be replicated as read-only volumes at several servers.
When this is done, there is only one read-write replica and all updates are directed to it.
The propagation of the changes to the read-only replicas is performed after the update
by an explicit operational procedure. Entries in the location database for volumes that
are replicated in this way are one-to-many, and the server for each client request is
selected on the bases of server loads and accessibility.
Bulktransfers • AFS transfers files between clients and servers in 64-kilobyte chunks.
The use of such a large packet size is an important aid to performance, minimizing the
effect of network latency. Thus the design of AFS enables the use of the network to be
optimized.
Partial file caching • The need to transfer the entire contents of files to clients even
when the application requirement is to read only a small portion of the file is an obvious
source of inefficiency. Version 3 of AFS removed this requirement, allowing file data
to be transferred and cached in 64-kbyte blocks while still retaining the consistency
semantics and other features of the AFS protocol.
Performance • The primary goal of AFS is scalability, so its performance with large
numbers of users is of particular interest. Howard et al. [1988] give details of extensive
comparative performance measurements, which were undertaken using a specially
developed AFS benchmark that has subsequently been widely used for the evaluation of
distributed file systems. Not surprisingly, whole-file caching and the callback protocol
led to dramatically reduced loads on the servers. Satyanarayanan [1989a] states that a
server load of 40% was measured with 18 client nodes running a standard benchmark,
against a load of 100% for NFS running the same benchmark. Satyanarayanan attributes
much of the performance advantage of AFS to the reduction in server load deriving from
the use of callbacks to notify clients of updates to files, compared with the timeout
mechanism used in NFS for checking the validity of pages cached at clients.
Wide area support: • Version 3 of AFS supports multiple administrative cells, each
with its own servers, clients, system administrators and users. Each cell is a completely
autonomous environment, but a federation of cells can cooperate in presenting users


===== page 575 =====
SECTION 12.5 ENHANCEMENTSAND FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS 557
with a uniform, seamless file name space. The resulting system was widely deployed by
the Transarc Corporation, and a detailed survey of the resulting performance usage
patterns was published [Spasojevic and Satyanarayanan 1996]. The system was installed
on over 1000 servers at over 150 sites. The survey showed cache hit ratios in the range
of 96 –98% for accesses to a sample of 32,000 file volumes holding 200 Gbytes of data.
12.5 Enhancements and further developments
Several advances have been made in the design of distributed file systems since the
emergence of NFS and AFS. In this section, we describe advances that enhance the
performance, availability and scalability of conventional distributed file systems. More
radical advances are described elsewhere in the book, including the maintenance of
consistency in replicated read-write filesystems to support disconnected operation and
high availability in the Bayou and Coda systems (Sections 18.4.2 and 18.4.3) and a
highly scalable architecture for the delivery of streams of real-time data with quality
guarantees in the Tiger video file server (Section 20.6.1).
NFS enhancements • Several research projects have addressed the need for one-copy
update semantics by extending the NFS protocol to include open and close operations
and adding a callback mechanism to enable the server to notify clients of the need to
invalidate cache entries. We describe two such efforts here; their results seem to indicate
that these enhancements can be accommodated without undue complexity or extra
communication costs.
Some recent efforts by Sun and other NFS developers have been directed at
making NFS servers more accessible and useful in wide-area networks. While the HTTP
protocol supported by web servers offers an effective and highly scalable method for
making whole files available to clients throughout the Internet, it is less useful to
application programs that require access to portions of large files or those that update
portions of files. The WebNFS development (described below) makes it possible for
application programs to become clients of NFS servers anywhere in the Internet (using
the NFS protocol directly instead of indirectly through a kernel module). This, together
with appropriate libraries for Java and other network programming languages, should
offer the possibility of implementing Internet applications that share data directly, such
as multi-user games or clients of large dynamic databases.
Achieving one-copy update semantics: The stateless server architecture of NFS brought
great advantages in terms of robustness and ease of implementation, but it precluded the
achievement of precise one-copy update semantics (the effects of concurrent writes by
different clients to the same file are not guaranteed to be the same as they would be in a
single UNIX system when multiple processes write to a local file). It also prevents the
use of callbacks notifying clients of changes to files, and this results in frequent getattr
requests from clients to check for file modification.
Two research systems have been developed that address these drawbacks. Spritely
NFS [Srinivasan and Mogul 1989, Mogul 1994] is a version of the file system developed
for the Sprite distributed operating system at Berkeley [Nelson et al. 1988]. Spritely
NFS is an implementation of the NFS protocol with the addition of open and close calls.


===== page 576 =====
558 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
Clients’ modules must send an open operation whenever a local user-level process opens
a file that is on the server. The parameters of the Sprite open operation specify a mode
(read, write or both) and include counts of the number of local processes that currently
have the file open for reading and for writing. Similarly, when a local process closes a
remote file, a close operation is sent to the server with updated counts of readers and
writers. The server records these numbers in an open files table with the IP address and
port number of the client.
When the server receives an open, it checks the open files table for other clients
that have the same file open and sends callback messages to those clients instructing
them to modify their caching strategy. If the open specifies write mode, then it will fail
if any other client has the file open for writing. Other clients that have the file open for
reading will be instructed to invalidate any locally cached portions of the file.
For open operations that specify read mode, the server sends a callback message
to any client that is writing, instructing it to stop caching (i.e., to use a strictly write-
through mode of operation), and it instructs all clients that are reading to cease caching
the file (so that all local read calls result in a request to the server).
These measures result in a file service that maintains the UNIX one-copy update
semantics at the expense of carrying some client-related state at the server. They also
enable some efficiency gains in the handling of cached writes. If the client-related state
is held in volatile memory at the server, it is vulnerable to server crashes. Spritely NFS
implements a recovery protocol that interrogates a list of clients that have recently
opened files on the server to recover the full open files table. The list of clients is stored
on disk, is updated relatively infrequently and is ‘pessimistic’ – it may safely include
more clients than those that had files open at the time of a crash. Failed clients may also
result in excess entries in the open files table, but these entries will be removed when the
clients restart.
When Spritely NFS was evaluated against NFS version 2, it showed a modest
performance improvement. This was due to the improved caching of writes. Changes in
NFS version 3 would probably result in at least as great an improvement, but the results
of the Spritely NFS project certainly indicate that it is possible to achieve one-copy
update semantics without substantial loss of performance, albeit at the expense of some
extra implementation complexity in the client and server modules and the need for a
recovery mechanism to restore the state after a server crash.
NQNFS: The NQNFS (Not Quite NFS) project [Macklem 1994] had similar aims to
Spritely NFS – to add more precise cache consistency to the NFS protocol and to
improve performance through better use of caching. An NQNFS server maintains
similar client-related state concerning open files, but it uses leases (Section 5.4.3) to aid
recovery after a server crash. The server sets an upper bound on the time for which a
client may hold a lease on an open file. If the client wishes to continue beyond that time,
it must renew the lease. Callbacks are used in a similar manner to Spritely NFS to
request clients to flush their caches when a write request occurs, but if the clients don’t
reply, the server simply waits until their leases expire before responding to the new write
request.
WebNFS: The advent of the Web and Java applets led to the recognition by the NFS
development team and others that some Internet applications could benefit from direct


===== page 577 =====
SECTION 12.5 ENHANCEMENTSAND FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS 559
access to NFS servers without many of the overheads associated with the emulation of
UNIX file operations included in standard NFS clients.
The aim of WebNFS (described in RFCs 2055 and 2056 [Callaghan 1996a,
1996b]) is to enable web browsers and other applications to access files on an NFS
server that ‘publishes’ them using a public file handle relative to a public root directory.
This mode of use bypasses the mount service and the port mapper service (described in
Chapter 5). WebNFS clients interact with an NFS server at a well-known port number
(2049). To access files by pathname, they issue lookup requests using a public file
handle. The public file handle has a well-known value that is interpreted specially by the
virtual file system at the server. Because of the high latency of wide-area networks, a
multicomponent variant of the lookup operation is used to look up a multi-part pathname
in a single request.
Thus WebNFS enables clients to be written that access portions of files stored in
NFS servers at remote sites with minimal setup overheads. There is provision for access
control and authentication, but in many cases the client will require only read access to
public files, and in that case the authentication option can be turned off. To read a
portion of a single file located on an NFS server that supports WebNFS requires the
establishment of a TCP connection and two RPC calls – a multicomponent lookup and
aread operation. The size of the block of data read is not limited by the NFS protocol.
For example, a weather service might publish a file on its NFS server containing
a large database of frequently updated weather data with a URL such as:
nfs://data.weather.gov/weatherdata/global.data
An interactive WeatherMap client, that displays weather maps could be constructed in
Java or any other language that supports a WebNFS procedure library. The client reads
only those portions of the /weatherdata/global.data file that are needed to construct the
particular maps requested by a user, whereas a similar application that used HTTP to
access a weather data server either would have to transfer the entire database to the client
or would require the support of a special-purpose server program to supply it with the
data it requires.
NFS version 4: A new version of the NFS protocol was introduced in 2000. The goals of
NFS version 4 are described in RFC 2624 [Shepler 1999] and in Brent Callaghan’s book
[Callaghan 1999]. Like WebNFS, it aims to make it practical to use NFS in wide-area
networks and Internet applications. It includes the features of WebNFS, but the
introduction of a new protocol also offers an opportunity to make more radical
enhancements. (WebNFS was restricted to changes to the server that did not involve the
addition of new operations to the protocol.)
NFS version 4 exploits results that have emerged from research in file server
design over the past decade, such as the use of callbacks or leases to maintain
consistency. NFS version 4 supports on-the-fly recovery from server faults by allowing
file systems to be moved to new servers transparently. Scalability is improved by using
proxy servers in a manner analogous to their use in the Web.
AFS enhancements • We have mentioned that DCE/DFS, the distributed file system
included in the Open Software Foundation’s Distributed Computing Environment
[www.opengroup.org], was based on the Andrew File System. The design of DCE/DFS
goes beyond AFS, particularly in its approach to cache consistency. In AFS, callbacks


===== page 578 =====
560 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
are generated only when the server receives a close operation for a file that has been
updated. DFS adopted a similar strategy to Spritely NFS and NQNFS to generating
callbacks as soon as a file is updated. In order to update a file, a client must obtain a write
token from the server, specifying a range of bytes in the file that the client is permitted
to update. When a write token is requested, clients holding copies of the same file for
reading receive revocation callbacks. Tokens of other types are used to achieve
consistency for cached file attributes and other metadata. All tokens have an associated
lifetime, and clients must renew them after their lifetime has expired.
Improvements in storage organization • There has been considerable progress in the
organization of file data stored on disks. The impetus for much of this work arose from
the increased loads and greater reliability that distributed file systems need to support,
and they have resulted in file systems with substantially improved performance. The
principal results of this work are:
Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID): This is a mode of storage
[Patterson et al. 1988, Chen et al. 1994] in which data blocks are segmented into
fixed-size chunks and stored in ‘stripes’ across several disks, along with redundant
error-correcting codes that enable the data blocks to be reconstructed completely and
operation to continue normally in the event of disk failures. RAID also produces
considerably better performance than a single disk, because the stripes that make up
a block are read and written concurrently.
Log-structured file storage (LFS): Like Spritely NFS, this technique originated in
the Sprite distributed operating system project at Berkeley [Rosenblum and
Ousterhout 1992]. The authors observed that as larger amounts of main memory
became available for caching in file servers, an increased level of cache hits resulted
in excellent read performance, but write performance remained mediocre. This arose
from the high latencies associated with writing individual data blocks to disk and
associated updates to metadata blocks (that is, the blocks known as i-nodes that hold
file attributes and a vector of pointers to the blocks in a file).
The LFS solution is to accumulate a set of writes in memory and then commit
them to disk in large, contiguous, fixed-sized segments. These are called log
segments because the data and metadata blocks are stored strictly in the order in
which they were updated. A log segment is 1 Mbyte or larger in size and is stored in
a single disk track, removing the disk head latencies associated with writing
individual blocks. Fresh copies of updated data and metadata blocks are always
written, requiring the maintenance of a dynamic map (in memory with a persistent
backup) pointing to the i-node blocks. Garbage collection of stale blocks is also
required, with compaction of ‘live’ blocks to leave contiguous areas of storage free
for the storage of log segments. The latter is a fairly complex process; it is carried out
as a background activity by a component called the cleaner. Some sophisticated
cleaner algorithms have been developed for it based on the results of simulations.
Despite these extra costs, the overall performance gain is outstanding;
Rosenblum and Ousterhout measured a write throughput as high as 70% of the
available disk bandwidth, compared with less than 10% for a conventional UNIX file
system. The log structure also simplifies recovery after server crashes. The Zebra file
system [Hartman and Ousterhout 1995], developed as a follow-on to the original LFS


===== page 579 =====
SECTION 12.5 ENHANCEMENTSAND FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS 561
work, combines log-structured writes with a distributed RAID approach – the log
segments are subdivided into sections with error-correcting data and written to disks
on separate network nodes. Performance four to five times better than that of NFS is
claimed for writing large files, with smaller gains for short files.
New design approaches • The availability of high-performance switched networks
(such as ATM and switched high-speed Ethernet) have prompted several efforts to
provide persistent storage systems that distribute file data in a highly scalable and fault-
tolerant manner among many nodes on an intranet, separating the responsibilities for
reading and writing data from the responsibilities for managing the metadata and
servicing client requests. In the following, we outline two such developments.
These approaches scale better than the more centralized servers that we have
described in the preceding sections. They generally demand a high level of trust among
the computers that cooperate to provide the service, because they include a fairly low-
level protocol for communication with the nodes holding data (somewhat analogous to
a ‘virtual disk’ API). Hence their scope is likely to be limited to a single local network.
xFS: A group at the University of California, Berkeley, proposed a serverless network
file system architecture and developed a prototype implementation called xFS
[Anderson et al. 1996]. Their approach was motivated by three factors:
1. the opportunity provided by fast switched LANs for multiple file servers in a local
network to transfer bulk data to clients concurrently;
2. increased demand for access to shared data;
3. the fundamental limitations of systems based on central file servers.
Concerning (3), they refer to the facts that the construction of high-performance NFS
servers requires relatively costly hardware with multiple CPUs, disks and network
controllers, and that there are limits to the process of partitioning the file space – i.e.,
placing shared files in separate filesystems mounted on different servers. They also
point to the fact that a central server represents a single point of failure.
xFS is ‘serverless’ in the sense that it distributes file server processing
responsibilities across a set of available computers in a local network at the granularity
of individual files. Storage responsibilities are distributed independently of management
and other service responsibilities: xFS implements a software RAID storage system,
striping file data across disks on multiple computers (in this regard it is a precursor to
the Tiger video file server described in Chapter 20), together with a log-structuring
technique similar to the Zebra file system.
Responsibility for the management of each file can be allocated to any of the
computers supporting the xFS service. This is achieved through a metadata structure
called the manager map, which is replicated at all clients and servers. File identifiers
include a field that acts as an index into the manager map, and each entry in the map
identifies the computer that is currently responsible for managing the corresponding file.
Several other metadata structures, similar to those found in other log-structured and
RAID storage systems, are used for the management of the log-structured file storage
and the striped disk storage.
Anderson et al. constructed a preliminary prototype of xFS and evaluated its
performance. The prototype was incomplete at the time the evaluation was carried out –


===== page 580 =====
562 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
the implementation of crash recovery was unfinished and the log-structured storage
scheme lacked a cleaner component to recover space occupied by stale logs and compact
files.
The performance evaluations carried out with this preliminary prototype used 32
single-processor and dual-processor Sun SPARCstations connected to a high-speed
network. The evaluations compared the xFS file service running on up to 32
workstations with NFS and with AFS, each running on a single dual-processor Sun
SPARCStation. The read and write bandwidths achieved with xFS with 32 servers
exceeded those of NFS and AFS with a single dual-processor server by approximately
a factor of 10. The difference in performance was much less marked when xFS was
compared with NFS and AFS using the standard AFS benchmark. But overall, the
results indicate that the highly distributed processing and storage architecture of xFS
offers a promising direction for achieving better scalability in distributed file systems.
Frangipani: Frangipani is a highly scalable distributed file system developed and
deployed at the Digital Systems Research Center (now Compaq Systems Research
Center) [Thekkath et al. 1997]. Its goals are very similar to those of xFS, and like xFS,
it approaches them with a design that separates persistent storage responsibilities from
other file service actions. But Frangipani’s service is structured as two totally
independent layers. The lower layer is provided by the Petal distributed virtual disk
system [Lee and Thekkath 1996].
Petal provides a distributed virtual disk abstraction across many disks located on
multiple servers on a switched local network. The virtual disk abstraction tolerates most
hardware and software failures with the aid of replicas of the stored data and
autonomously balances the load on servers by relocating data. Petal virtual disks are
accessed through a UNIX disk driver using standard block input-output operations, so
they can be used to support most file systems. Petal adds between 10 and 100% to the
latency of disk accesses, but the caching strategy results in read and write throughputs
at least as good as those of the underlying disk drives.
Frangipani server modules run within the operating system kernel. As in xFS, the
responsibility for managing files and associated tasks (including the provision of a file-
locking service for clients) is assigned to hosts dynamically, and all machines see a
unified file name space with coherent access (with approximately single-copy
semantics) to shared updatable files. Data is stored in a log-structured and striped format
in the Petal virtual disk store. The use of Petal relieves Frangipani of the need to manage
physical disk space, resulting in a much simpler distributed file system implementation.
Frangipani can emulate the service interfaces of several existing file services, including
NFS and DCE/DFS. Frangipani’s performance is at least as good as that of the Digital
implementation of the UNIX file system.


===== page 581 =====
SECTION 12.6 SUMMARY 563
12.6 Summary
The key design issues for distributed file systems are:
(cid:129) the effective use of client caching to achieve performance equal to or better than
that of local file systems;
(cid:129) the maintenance of consistency between multiple cached client copies of files
when they are updated;
(cid:129) recovery after client or server failure;
(cid:129) high throughput for reading and writing files of all sizes;
(cid:129) scalability.
Distributed file systems are very heavily employed in organizational computing, and
their performance has been the subject of much tuning. NFS has a simple stateless
protocol, but it has maintained its early position as the dominant distributed file system
technology with the help of some relatively minor enhancements to the protocol, tuned
implementations and high-performance hardware support.
AFS demonstrated the feasibility of a relatively simple architecture using server
state to reduce the cost of maintaining coherent client caches. AFS outperforms NFS in
many situations. Recent advances have employed data striping across multiple disks and
log-structured writing to further improve performance and scalability.
Current state-of-the-art distributed file systems are highly scalable, provide good
performance across both local and wide-area networks, maintain one-copy file update
semantics and tolerate and recover from failures. Future requirements include support
for mobile users with disconnected operation, and automatic reintegration and quality of
service guarantees to meet the need for the persistent storage and delivery of streams of
multimedia and other time-dependent data. Solutions to these requirements are
discussed in Chapters 18 and 20.
EXERCISES
12.1 Why is there no open or close operation in our interface to the flat file service or the
directory service? What are the differences between our directory service Lookup
operation and the UNIX open? pages 532–534
12.2 Outline methods by which a client module could emulate the UNIX file system interface
using our model file service. pages 532–534
12.3 Write a procedure PathLookup(Pathname, Dir)(cid:111)(cid:3)UFID that implements Lookup for
UNIX-like pathnames based on our model directory service. pages 532–534
12.4 Why should UFIDs be unique across all possible file systems? How is uniqueness for
UFIDs ensured? page 535


===== page 582 =====
564 CHAPTER 12 DISTRIBUTED FILE SYSTEMS
12.5 To what extent does Sun NFS deviate from one-copy file update semantics? Construct
a scenario in which two user-level processes sharing a file would operate correctly in a
single UNIX host but would observe inconsistencies when running in different hosts.(cid:3)
page 542
12.6 Sun NFS aims to support heterogeneous distributed systems by the provision of an
operating system–independent file service. What are the key decisions that the
implementer of an NFS server for an operating system other than UNIX would have to
take? What constraints should an underlying filing system obey to be suitable for the
implementation of NFS servers? page 536
12.7 What data must the NFS client module hold on behalf of each user-level process?(cid:3)
pages 536–537
12.8 Outline client module implementations for the UNIX open() and read() system calls,
using the NFS RPC calls of Figure 12.9, (i) without and (ii) with a client cache.(cid:3)
pages 538,542
12.9 Explain why the RPC interface to early implementations of NFS is potentially insecure.
The security loophole has been closed in NFS 3 by the use of encryption. How is the
encryption key kept secret? Is the security of the key adequate? pages 539,544
12.10 After the timeout of an RPC call to access a file on a hard-mounted file system the NFS
client module does not return control to the user-level process that originated the call.
Why? page 539
12.11 How does the NFS automounter help to improve the performance and scalability of
NFS? page 541
12.12 How many lookup calls are needed to resolve a five-part pathname (for example,
/usr/users/jim/code/xyz.c) for a file that is stored on an NFS server? What is the reason
for performing the translation step-by-step? page 540
12.13 What condition must be fulfilled by the configuration of the mount tables at the client
computers for access transparency to be achieved in an NFS-based filing system?(cid:3)
page 540
12.14 How does AFS gain control when an open or close system call referring to a file in the
shared file space is issued by a client? page 549
12.15 Compare the update semantics of UNIX when accessing local files with those of NFS
and AFS. Under what circumstances might clients become aware of the differences?(cid:3)
pages 542,554
12.16 How does AFS deal with the risk that callback messages may be lost? page 552
12.17 Which features of the AFS design make it more scalable than NFS? What are the limits
on its scalability, assuming that servers can be added as required? Which recent
developments offer greater scalability? pages545,556,561


===== page 583 =====
13
NAME SERVICES
13.1 Introduction
13.2 Name services and the Domain Name System
13.3 Directory services
13.4 Case study: The Global Name Service
13.5 Case study: The X.500 Directory Service
13.6 Summary
This chapter introduces the name service as a distinct service that is used by client
processes to obtain attributes such as the addresses of resources or objects when given
their names. The entities named can be of many types, and they may be managed by
different services. For example, name services are often used to hold the addresses and
other details of users, computers, network domains, services and remote objects. As well
as name services, we describe directory services, which look up services when given
some of their attributes.
Basic design issues for name services, such as the structure and management of
the space of names recognized by the service and the operations that the name service
supports, are outlined and illustrated in the context of the Internet Domain Name
System(DNS).
We also examine how name services are implemented, covering such aspects as
navigation through a collection of name servers when resolving a name, caching naming
data and replicating naming data to increase performance and availability.
Two further case studies are included: the Global Name Service (GNS), and the
X.500 Directory Service, including LDAP.
565


===== page 584 =====
566 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
13.1 Introduction
In a distributed system, names are used to refer to a wide variety of resources such as
computers, services, remote objects and files, as well as to users. Naming is an issue that
is easily overlooked but is nonetheless fundamental in distributed system design. Names
facilitate communication and resource sharing. A name is needed to request a computer
system to act upon a specific resource chosen out of many; for example, a name in the
form of a URL is needed to access a specific web page. Processes cannot share particular
resources managed by a computer system unless they can name them consistently. Users
cannot communicate with one another via a distributed system unless they can name one
another, for example, with email addresses.
Names are not the only useful means of identification: descriptive attributes are
another. Sometimes clients do not know the name of the particular entity that they seek,
but they do have some information that describes it. Or they may require a service and
know some of its characteristics but not what entity implements it.
This chapter introduces name services, which provide clients with data about
named objects in distributed systems, and the related concept of directory services,
which provide data about objects that satisfy a given description. We describe
approaches to be taken in the design and implementation of these services, using the
Domain Name Service (DNS), the Global Name Service (GNS) and X500 as case
studies. We begin by examining the fundamental concepts of names and attributes.
13.1.1 Names,addressesand otherattributes
Any process that requires access to a specific resource must possess a name or an
identifier for it. Examples of human-readable names are file names such as /etc/passwd,
URLs such as http://www.cdk5.net/ and Internet domain names such as www.cdk5.net.
The term identifier is sometimes used to refer to names that are interpreted only by
programs. Remote object references and NFS file handles are examples of identifiers.
Identifiers are chosen for the efficiency with which they can be looked up and stored by
software.
Needham [1993] makes the distinction between a pure name and other names.
Pure names are simply uninterpreted bit patterns. Non-pure names contain information
about the object that they name; in particular, they may contain information about the
location of the object. Pure names always have to be looked up before they can be of any
use. At the other extreme from a pure name is an object’s address: a value that identifies
the location of the object rather than the object itself. Addresses are efficient for
accessing objects, but objects can sometimes be relocated, so addresses are inadequate
as a means of identification. For example, users’ email addresses usually have to change
when they move between organizations or Internet service providers; they are not in
themselves guaranteed to refer to a specific individual over time.
We say that a name is resolved when it is translated into data about the named
resource or object, often in order to invoke an action upon it. The association between a
name and an object is called a binding. In general, names are bound to attributes of the
named objects, rather than the implementation of the objects themselves. An attribute is


===== page 585 =====
SECTION 13.1 INTRODUCTION 567
Figure 13.1 Composed naming domains used to access a resource from a URL
URL
http://www.cdk5.net:8888/WebExamples/earth.html
DNS lookup
Resource ID (IP number, port number, pathname)
55.55.55.55 8888 WebExamples/earth.html
Web server
Network address
2:60:8c:2:b0:5a file
Socket
the value of a property associated with an object. A key attribute of an entity that is
usually relevant in a distributed system is its address. For example:
(cid:129) The DNS maps domain names to the attributes of a host computer: its IP address,
the type of entry (for example, a reference to a mail server or another host) and,
for example, the length of time the host’s entry will remain valid.
(cid:129) The X500 directory service can be used to map a person’s name onto attributes
including their email address and telephone number.
(cid:129) The CORBA Naming Service and Trading Service were presented in Chapter 8.
The Naming Service maps the name of a remote object onto its remote object
reference, whereas the Trading Service maps the name of a remote object onto its
remote object reference, together with an arbitrary number of attributes describing
the object in terms understandable by human users.
Note that an ‘address’ may be considered just another name that must be looked up, or
it may contain such a name. An IP address must be looked up to obtain a network
address such as an Ethernet address. Similarly, web browsers and email clients make use
of the DNS to interpret the domain names in URLs and email addresses. Figure 13.1
shows the domain name portion of a URL resolved first via the DNS into an IP address
and then, at the final hop of Internet routing, via ARP to an Ethernet address for the web
server. The last part of the URL is resolved by the file system on the web server to locate
the relevant file.
Namesandservices • Many of the names used in a distributed system are specific to
some particular service. For example, users of the social networking web site
twitter.com, have names such as @magmapoetry that no other service resolves. Also, a
client may use a service-specific name when requesting a service to perform an
operation upon a named object or resource that it manages. For example, a file name is
given to the file service when requesting that the file be deleted, and a process identifier
is presented to the process management service when requesting that it be sent a signal.


===== page 586 =====
568 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
These names are used only in the context of the service that manages the objects named,
except when clients communicate about shared objects.
Names are also sometimes needed to refer to entities in a distributed system that
are beyond the scope of any single service. The major examples of these entities are
users (with proper names and email addresses), computers (with hostnames such as
www.cdk5.net) and services themselves (such as file service or printer service). In
object-based middleware, names refer to remote objects that provide services or
applications. Note that many of these names must be readable by and meaningful to
humans, since users and system administrators need to refer to the major components
and configuration of distributed systems, programmers need to refer to services in
programs, and users need to communicate with each other via the distributed system and
discuss what services are available in different parts of it. Given the connectivity
provided by the Internet, these naming requirements are potentially world-wide in
scope.
UniformResourceIdentifiers • Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) [Berners-Lee et al.
2005] came about from the need to identify resources on the Web, and other Internet
resources such as electronic mailboxes. An important goal was to identify resources in
a coherent way, so that they could all be processed by common software such as
browsers. URIs are ‘uniform’ in that their syntax incorporates that of indefinitely many
individual types of resource identifiers (that is, URI schemes), and there are procedures
for managing the global namespace of schemes. The advantage of uniformity is that it
eases the process of introducing new types of identifier, as well as using existing types
of identifier in new contexts, without disrupting existing usage.
For example, if someone was to invent a new type of ‘widget’ URI, then URIs
beginning widget: would have to obey the global URI syntax, as well as any local rules
defined for the widget identifier scheme. These URIs would identify widget resources
in a well-defined way. But even existing software that did not access widget resources
could still process widget URIs –for example, by managing directories containing them.
Turning to an example of incorporating existing identifiers, that has been done for
telephone numbers by prefixing them with the scheme name tel and standardizing their
representation, as in tel:+1-816-555-1212. These tel URIs are intended for uses such as
web links that cause telephone calls to be made when invoked.
Uniform Resource Locators: Some URIs contain information that can be used to locate
and access a resource; others are pure resource names. The familiar term Uniform
Resource Locator (URL) is often used for URIs that provide location information and
specify the method for accessing the resource, including the ‘http’ URLs introduced in
Section 1.6. For example, http://www.cdk5.net/ identifies a web page at the given path
(‘/’) on the host www.cdk5.net, and specifies that the HTTP protocol be used to access
it. Another example is a ‘mailto’ URL, such as mailto:fred@flintstone.org, which
identifies the mailbox at the given address.
URLs are efficient identifiers for accessing resources. But they suffer from the
disadvantage that if a resource is deleted or if it moves, say from one web site to another,
there may be dangling links to the resource containing the old URL. If a user clicks on
a dangling link to a web resource, then the web server will either respond that the
resource is not found or – worse, perhaps – supply a different resource that now occupies
the same location.


===== page 587 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 569
Uniform Resource Names: Uniform Resource Names (URNs) are URIs that are used as
pure resource names rather than locators. For example, the URI:
mid:0E4FC272-5C02-11D9-B115-000A95B55BC8@hpl.hp.com
is a URN that identifies the email message containing it in its ‘Message-Id’ field. The
URI distinguishes that message from any other email message. But it does not provide
the message’s address in any store, so a lookup operation is needed to find it.
A special subtree of URIs beginning with urn: has been reserved for URNs –
although, as the mid: example shows, not all URNs are urn: URIs. The latter urn-
prefixed URIs are all of the form urn:nameSpace:nameSpace-specificName. For
example,urn:ISBN:0-201-62433-8 identifies books that bear the name 0-201-62433-8 in
the standard ISBN naming scheme. For another example, the (invented) name
urn:doi:10.555/music-pop-1234 refers to the publication called music-pop-1234 in the
naming scheme of the publisher known as 10.555 in the Digital Object Identifier (DOI)
scheme [www.doi.org].
There are resolution services (name services, in the terminology of this chapter)
such as the Handle System [www.handle.net] for resolving URNs such as DOIs to
resource attributes, but none is in widespread use. Indeed, there continues to be debate
in the Web and Internet research communities about the extent to which a separate
category of URNs is needed. One school of thought is that ‘cool URLs do not change’
– in other words, that everyone should assign URLs to resources with guarantees about
their continuity of reference. Against that point of view is the observation that not
everyone is in a position to make such guarantees, which require the wherewithal to
maintain control of a domain name and administer resources carefully.
13.2 Name services and the Domain Name System
A name service stores information about a collection of textual names, in the form of
bindings between the names and the attributes of the entities they denote, such as users,
computers, services and objects. The collection is often subdivided into one or more
naming contexts: individual subsets of the bindings that are managed as a unit. The
major operation that a name service supports is to resolve a name – that is, to look up
attributes from a given name. We describe the implementation of name resolution in
Section13.2.2. Operations are also required for creating new bindings, deleting bindings
and listing bound names, and adding and deleting contexts.
Name management is separated from other services largely because of the
openness of distributed systems, which brings the following motivations:
Unification:It is often convenient for resources managed by different services to use
the same naming scheme. URIs are a good example of this.
Integration:It is not always possible to predict the scope of sharing in a distributed
system. It may become necessary to share and therefore name resources that were
created in different administrative domains. Without a common name service, the
administrative domains may use entirely different naming conventions.


===== page 588 =====
570 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Generalnameservicerequirements • Name services were originally quite simple, since
they were designed only to meet the need to bind names to addresses in a single
management domain, corresponding to a single LAN or WAN. The interconnection of
networks and the increased scale of distributed systems have produced a much larger
name-mapping problem.
Grapevine [Birrell et al. 1982] was one of the earliest extensible, multi-domain
name services. It was designed to be scalable in the number of names and the load of
requests that it could handle.
The Global Name Service, developed at the Digital Equipment Corporation
Systems Research Center [Lampson 1986], is a descendant of Grapevine with ambitious
goals, including:
To handle an essentially arbitrary number of names and to serve an arbitrary number
of administrative organizations: For example, the system should be capable of
handling the names of all the documents in the world.
A long lifetime: Many changes will occur in the organization of the set of names and
in the components that implement the service during its lifetime.
High availability: Most other systems depend upon the name service; they can’t
work when it is broken.
Fault isolation: Local failures should not cause the entire service to fail.
Tolerance of mistrust: A large open system cannot have any component that is
trusted by all of the clients in the system.
Two examples of name services that have concentrated on the goal of scalability to large
numbers of objects such as documents are the Globe name service [van Steen et al.
1998] and the Handle System [www.handle.net]. Far more familiar is the Internet
Domain Name System (DNS), introduced in Chapter 3, which names computers (and
other entities) across the Internet.
In this section, we discuss the main design issues for name services, giving
examples from the DNS. We follow this with a more detailed case study of the DNS.
13.2.1 Name spaces
Aname space is the collection of all valid names recognized by a particular service. The
service will attempt to look up a valid name, even though that name may prove not to
correspond to any object – i.e., to be unbound. Name spaces require a syntactic
definition to separate valid names from invalid names. For example, ‘...’ is not
acceptable as the DNS name of a computer, whereas www.cdk99.net is valid (even
though it is unbound).
Names may have an internal structure that represents their position in a hierarchic
name space such as pathnames in a file system, or in an organizational hierarchy such
as Internet domain names; or they may be chosen from a flat set of numeric or symbolic
identifiers. One important advantage of a hierarchy is that it makes large name spaces
more manageable. Each part of a hierarchic name is resolved relative to a separate
context of relatively small size, and the same name may be used with different meanings
in different contexts, to suit different situations of use. In the case of file systems, each


===== page 589 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 571
directory represents a context. Thus /etc/passwd is a hierarchic name with two
components. The first, ‘etc’, is resolved relative to the context ‘/’, or root, and the second
part, ‘passwd’, is relative to the context ‘/etc’. The name /oldetc/passwd can have a
different meaning because its second component is resolved in a different context.
Similarly, the same name /etc/passwd may resolve to different files in the contexts of
two different computers.
Hierarchic name spaces are potentially infinite, so they enable a system to grow
indefinitely. By contrast, flat name spaces are usually finite; their size is determined by
fixing a maximum permissible length for names. Another potential advantage of a
hierarchic name space is that different contexts can be managed by different people or
organizations.
The structure of ‘http’ URLs was introduced in Chapter 1. The URL name space
also includes relative names such as ../images/figure1.jpg. When a browser or other web
client encounters such a relative name, it uses the resource in which the relative name is
embedded to determine the server host name and the directory to which this pathname
refers.
DNS names are strings called domain names. Some examples are www.cdk5.net
(a computer), net,com and ac.uk (the latter three are domains).
The DNS name space has a hierarchic structure: a domain name consists of one or
more strings called name components or labels, separated by the delimiter ‘.’. There is
no delimiter at the beginning or end of a domain name, although the root of the DNS
name space is sometimes referred to as ‘.’ for administrative purposes. The name
components are non-null printable strings that do not contain ‘.’. In general, a prefix of
a name is an initial section of the name that contains only zero or more entire
components. For example, in DNS www and www.cdk5 are both prefixes of
www.cdk5.net. DNS names are not case-sensitive, so www.cdk5.net and
WWW.CDK5.NET have the same meaning.
DNS servers do not recognize relative names: all names are referred to the global
root. However, in practical implementations, client software keeps a list of domain
names that are appended automatically to any single-component name before resolution.
For example, the name www presented in the domain cdk5.net probably refers to
www.cdk5.net; client software will append the default domain cdk5.net and attempt to
resolve this name. If this fails, then further default domain names may be appended;
finally, the (absolute) name www will be presented to the root for resolution (an
operation that will of course fail in this case). Names with more than one component,
however, are normally presented intact to the DNS, as absolute names.
Aliases • An alias is a name defined to denote the same information as another name,
similar to a symbolic link between file path names. Aliases allow more convenient
names to be substituted for relatively complicated ones, and allow alternative names to
be used by different people for the same entity. An example is the common use of URL
shorteners, often used in Twitter posts and other situations where space is at a premium.
For example, using web redirection, http://bit.ly/ctqjvH refers to
http://cdk5.net/additional/rmi/programCode/ShapeListClient.java. As another
example, the DNS allows aliases in which one domain name is defined to stand for
another. Aliases are often used to specify the names of machines that run a web server
or an FTP server. For example, the name www.cdk5.net is an alias for cdk5.net. This has


===== page 590 =====
572 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
the advantage that clients can use either name for the web server, and if the web server
is moved to another computer, only the entry for cdk5.net needs to be updated in the
DNS database.
Naming domains • A naming domain is a name space for which there exists a single
overall administrative authority responsible for assigning names within it. This authority
is in overall control of which names may be bound within the domain, but it is free to
delegate this task.
Domains in DNS are collections of domain names; syntactically, a domain’s name
is the common suffix of the domain names within it, but otherwise it cannot be
distinguished from, for example, a computer name. For example, net is a domain that
contains cdk5.net. Note that the term ‘domain name’ is potentially confusing, since only
some domain names identify domains (others identify computers).
The administration of domains may be devolved to subdomains. The domain
dcs.qmul.ac.uk – the Department of Computer Science at Queen Mary, University of
London in the UK – can contain any name the department wishes. But the domain name
dcs.qmul.ac.uk itself had to be agreed with the college authorities, who manage the
domain qmul.ac.uk. Similarly, qmul.ac.uk had to be agreed with the registered authority
for ac.uk, and so on.
Responsibility for a naming domain normally goes hand in hand with
responsibility for managing and keeping up-to-date the corresponding part of the
database stored in an authoritative name server and used by the name service. Naming
data belonging to different naming domains are in general stored by distinct name
servers managed by the corresponding authorities.
Combiningandcustomizingnamespaces • The DNS provides a global and homogene-
ous name space in which a given name refers to the same entity, no matter which process
on which computer looks up the name. By contrast, some name services allow distinct
name spaces – sometimes heterogeneous name spaces – to be embedded into them; and
some name services allow the name space to be customized to suit the needs of individ-
ual groups, users or even processes.
Merging: The practice of mounting file systems in UNIX and NFS (see Section 12.3)
provides an example in which a part of one name space is conveniently embedded in
another. But consider how to merge the entire UNIX file systems of two (or more)
computers called red and blue. Each computer has its own root, with overlapping file
names. For example, /etc/passwd refers to one file on red and a different file on blue.
The obvious way to merge the file systems is to replace each computer’s root with a
‘super root’ and mount each computer’s file system in this super root, say as /red and
/blue. Users and programs can then refer to /red/etc/passwd and /blue/etc/passwd. But
the new naming convention by itself would cause programs on the two computers that
still use the old name /etc/passwd to malfunction. A solution is to leave the old root
contents on each computer and embed the mounted file systems /red and /blue of both
computers (assuming that this does not produce name clashes with the old root
contents).
The moral is that we can always merge name spaces by creating a higher-level root
context, but this may raise a problem of backward-compatibility. Fixing the
compatibility problem, in turn, leaves us with hybrid name spaces and the inconvenience
of having to translate old names between the users of the two computers.


===== page 591 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 573
Heterogeneity: The Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) name space [OSF
1997] allows heterogeneous name spaces to be embedded within it. DCE names may
contain junctions, which are similar to mount points in NFS and UNIX (see Section
12.3), except that they allow heterogeneous name spaces to be mounted. For example,
consider the full DCE name /.../dcs.qmul.ac.uk/principals/Jean.Dollimore. The first part
of this name, /.../dcs.qmul.ac.uk, denotes a context called a cell. The next component is
a junction. For example, the junction principals is a context containing security
principals in which the final component, Jean.Dollimore, may be looked up, and in
which these principal names have their own syntax. Similarly, in
/.../dcs.qmul.ac.uk/files/pub/reports/TR2000-99, the junction files is a context
corresponding to a file system directory, in which the final component
pub/reports/TR2000-99 is looked up and in which the file name space has a distinct
syntax. The two junctions principals and files are the roots of heterogeneous name
spaces, implemented by heterogeneous name services.
Customization: We saw in the example of embedding NFS-mounted file systems above
that sometimes users prefer to construct their name spaces independently rather than
sharing a single name space. File system mounting enables users to import files that are
stored on servers and shared, while the other names continue to refer to local, unshared
files and can be administered autonomously. But the same files accessed from two
different computers may be mounted at different points and thus have different names.
Not sharing the entire name space means users must translate names between
computers.
The Spring naming service [Radia et al. 1993] provides the ability to construct
name spaces dynamically and to share individual naming contexts selectively. Even two
different processes on the same computer can have different naming contexts. Spring
naming contexts are first-class objects that can be shared around a distributed system.
For example, suppose a user on computer red wishes to run a program on blue that issues
file pathnames such as /etc/passwd, but these names are to resolve to the files on red’s
file system, not blue’s. This can be achieved in Spring by passing a reference to red’s
local naming context to blue and using it as the program’s naming context. Plan 9 [Pike
et al. 1993] also allows processes to have their own file system name space. A novel
feature of Plan 9 (which can also be implemented in Spring) is that physical directories
can be ordered and merged into a single logical directory. The effect is that a name
looked up in the single logical directory is looked up in the succession of physical
directories until there is a match, when the attributes are returned. This eliminates the
need to supply lists of paths when looking for program or library files.
13.2.2 Name resolution
For the common case of hierarchic name spaces, name resolution is an iterative or
recursive process whereby a name is repeatedly presented to naming contexts in order
to look up the attributes to which it refers. A naming context either maps a given name
onto a set of primitive attributes (such as those of a user) directly, or maps it onto a
further naming context and a derived name to be presented to that context. To resolve a
name, it is first presented to some initial naming context; resolution iterates as long as
further contexts and derived names are output. We illustrated this at the start of Section


===== page 592 =====
574 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
13.2.1 with the example of /etc/passwd, in which ‘etc’ is presented to the context ‘/’, and
then ‘passwd’ is presented to the context ‘/etc’.
Another example of the iterative nature of resolution is the use of aliases. For
example, whenever a DNS server is asked to resolve an alias such as
www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk, the server first resolves the alias to another domain name (in this
casetraffic.dcs.qmul.ac.uk), which must be further resolved to produce an IP address.
In general, the use of aliases makes it possible for cycles to be present in the name
space, in which case resolution may never terminate. Two possible solutions are, to
abandon a resolution process if it passes a threshold number of resolutions, or to leave
administrators to veto any aliases that would introduce cycles.
Nameserversandnavigation • Any name service, such as DNS, that stores a very large
database and is used by a large population will not store all of its naming information on
a single server computer. Such a server would be a bottleneck and a critical point of
failure. Any heavily used name services should use replication to achieve high
availability. We shall see that DNS specifies that each subset of its database is replicated
in at least two failure-independent servers.
We mentioned above that the data belonging to a naming domain is usually stored
by a local name server managed by the authority responsible for that domain. Although,
in some cases, a name server may store data for more than one domain, it is generally
true to say that data is partitioned into servers according to its domain. We shall see that
in DNS, most of the entries are for local computers. But there are also name servers for
the higher domains, such as yahoo.com and ac.uk, and for the root.
The partitioning of data implies that the local name server cannot answer all
enquiries without the help of other name servers. For example, a name server in the
dcs.qmul.ac.uk domain would not be able to supply the IP address of a computer in the
domain cs.purdue.edu unless it was cached – certainly not the first time it is asked.
The process of locating naming data from more than one name server in order to
resolve a name is called navigation. The client name resolution software carries out
navigation on behalf of the client. It communicates with name servers as necessary to
resolve a name. It may be provided as library code and linked into clients, as for example
in the BIND implementation for DNS (see Section 13.2.3) or in Grapevine [Birrell et al.
1982]. The alternative, used with X500, is to provide name resolution in a separate
process that is shared by all of the client processes on that computer.
One navigation model that DNS supports is known as iterative navigation (see
Figure 13.2). To resolve a name, a client presents the name to the local name server,
which attempts to resolve it. If the local name server has the name, it returns the result
immediately. If it does not, it will suggest another server that will be able to help.
Resolution proceeds at the new server, with further navigation as necessary until the
name is located or is discovered to be unbound.
As DNS is designed to hold entries for millions of domains and is accessed by vast
numbers of clients, it would not be feasible to have all queries starting at a root server,
even if it were replicated heavily. The DNS database is partitioned between servers in
such a way as to allow many queries to be satisfied locally and others to be satisfied
without needing to resolve each part of the name separately. The scheme for resolving
names in DNS is described in more detail in Section 13.2.3.


===== page 593 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 575
Figure 13.2 Iterative navigation
NS2
2
Name
1 NS1 servers
Client
3
NS3
A client iteratively contacts name servers NS1–NS3 in order to resolve a name
NFS also employs iterative navigation in the resolution of a file name, on a
component-by-component basis (see Chapter 12). This is because the file service may
encounter a symbolic link when resolving a name. A symbolic link must be interpreted
in the client’s file system name space because it may point to a file in a directory stored
at another server. The client computer must determine which server this is, because only
the client knows its mount points.
In multicast navigation, a client multicasts the name to be resolved and the
required object type to the group of name servers. Only the server that holds the named
attributes responds to the request. Unfortunately, however, if the name proves to be
unbound, the request is greeted with silence. Cheriton and Mann [1989] describe a
multicast-based navigation scheme in which a separate server is included in the group
to respond when the required name is unbound.
Another alternative to the iterative navigation model is one in which a name server
coordinates the resolution of the name and passes the result back to the user agent. Ma
[1992] distinguishes non-recursive and recursive server-controlled navigation (Figure
13.3). Under non-recursive server-controlled navigation, any name server may be
chosen by the client. This server communicates by multicast or iteratively with its peers
in the style described above, as though it were a client. Under recursive server-controlled
navigation, the client once more contacts a single server. If this server does not store the
name, the server contacts a peer storing a (larger) prefix of the name, which in turn
attempts to resolve it. This procedure continues recursively until the name is resolved.
If a name service spans distinct administrative domains, then clients executing in
one administrative domain may be prohibited from accessing name servers belonging to
another such domain. Moreover, even name servers may be prohibited from discovering
the disposition of naming data across name servers in another administrative domain.
Then, both client-controlled and non-recursive server-controlled navigation are
inappropriate, and recursive server-controlled navigation must be used. Authorized
name servers request name service data from designated name servers managed by
different administrations, which return the attributes without revealing where the
different parts of the naming database are stored.


===== page 594 =====
576 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Figure 13.3 Non-recursive and recursive server-controlled navigation
NS2 NS2
2 2
1 4 3
1
client NS1 client NS1
4 3 5
NS3 NS3
Non-recursive Recursive
server-controlled server-controlled
A name server NS1 communicates with other name servers on behalf of a client
Caching • In DNS and other name services, client name resolution software and servers
maintain a cache of the results of previous name resolutions. When a client requests a
name lookup, the name resolution software consults its cache. If it holds a recent result
from a previous lookup for the name, it returns it to the client; otherwise, it sets about
finding it from a server. That server, in turn, may return data cached from other servers.
Caching is key to a name service’s performance and assists in maintaining the
availability of both the name service and other services in spite of name server crashes.
Its role in enhancing response times by saving communication with name servers is
clear. Caching can be used to eliminate high-level name servers – the root server, in
particular – from the navigation path, allowing resolution to proceed despite some server
failures.
Caching by client name resolvers is widely applied in name services and is
particularly successful because naming data are changed relatively rarely. For example,
information such as computer or service addresses is liable to remain unchanged for
months or years. However, the possibility exists of a name service returning out-of-date
attributes – for example, an out-of-date address – during resolution.
13.2.3 The Domain Name System
The Domain Name System is a name service design whose main naming database is
used across the Internet. It was devised principally by Mockapetris and specified in RFC
1034 [Mockapetris 1987] and RFC 1035. DNS replaced the original Internet naming
scheme, in which all host names and addresses were held in a single central master file
and downloaded by FTP to all computers that required them [Harrenstien et al. 1985].
This original scheme was soon seen to suffer from three major shortcomings:
(cid:129) It did not scale to large numbers of computers.
(cid:129) Local organizations wished to administer their own naming systems.
(cid:129) A general name service was needed –not one that serves only for looking up
computer addresses.


===== page 595 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 577
The objects named by the DNS are primarily computers – for which mainly IP addresses
are stored as attributes – and what we have referred to in this chapter as naming domains
are called simply domains in the DNS. In principle, however, any type of object can be
named, and its architecture gives scope for a variety of implementations. Organizations
and departments within them can manage their own naming data. Millions of names are
bound by the Internet DNS, and lookups are made against it from around the world. Any
name can be resolved by any client. This is achieved by hierarchical partitioning of the
name database, by replication of the naming data, and by caching.
Domainnames • The DNS is designed for use in multiple implementations, each of
which may have its own name space. In practice, however, only one is in widespread
use, and that is the one used for naming across the Internet. The Internet DNS name
space is partitioned both organizationally and according to geography. The names are
written with the highest-level domain on the right. The original top-level organizational
domains (also called generic domains) in use across the Internet were:
com – Commercial organizations
edu – Universities and other educational institutions
gov – US governmental agencies
mil – US military organizations
net – Major network support centres
org – Organizations not mentioned above
int – International organizations
New top-level domains such as biz and mobi have been added since the early 2000s. A
full list of current generic domain names is available from the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority [www.iana.org I].
In addition, every country has its own domains:
us – United States
uk – United Kingdom
fr – France
... – ...
Countries, particularly those other than the US often use their own subdomains to
distinguish their organizations. The UK, for example, has domains co.uk and ac.uk,
which correspond to com and edu respectively (ac stands for ‘academic community’).
Note that, despite its geographic-sounding uksuffix, a domain such as doit.co.uk
could have data referring to computers in the Spanish office of Doit Ltd., a notional
British company. In other words, even geographic-sounding domain names are
conventional and are completely independent of their physical locations.
DNSqueries • The Internet DNS is primarily used for simple host name resolution
and for looking up electronic mail hosts, as follows:
Host name resolution: In general, applications use the DNS to resolve host names
into IP addresses. For example, when a web browser is given a URL containing the


===== page 596 =====
578 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
domain name www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk, it makes a DNS enquiry and obtains the
corresponding IP address. As was pointed out in Chapter 4, browsers then use HTTP
to communicate with the web server at the given IP address, using a reserved port
number if none is specified in the URL. FTP and SMTP services work in a similar
way; for example, an FTP program may be given the domain name ftp.dcs.qmul.ac.uk
and can make a DNS enquiry to get its IP address and then use TCP to communicate
with it at the reserved port number.
Mail host location: Electronic mail software uses the DNS to resolve domain names
into the IP addresses of mail hosts – i.e., computers that will accept mail for those
domains. For example, when the address tom@dcs.rnx.ac.uk is to be resolved, the
DNS is queried with the address dcs.rnx.ac.uk and the type designation ‘mail’. It
returns a list of domain names of hosts that can accept mail for dcs.rnx.ac.uk, if such
exist (and, optionally, the corresponding IP addresses). The DNS may return more
than one domain name so that the mail software can try alternatives if the main mail
host is unreachable for some reason. The DNS returns an integer preference value for
each mail host, indicating the order in which the mail hosts should be tried.
Some other types of query that are implemented in some installations but are less
frequently used than those just given are:
Reverse resolution: Some software requires a domain name to be returned given an
IP address. This is just the reverse of the normal host name query, but the name server
receiving the query replies only if the IP address is in its own domain.
Host information: The DNS can store the machine architecture type and operating
system with the domain names of hosts. It has been suggested that this option should
not be used in public, because it provides useful information for those attempting to
gain unauthorized access to computers.
In principle, the DNS can be used to store arbitrary attributes. A query is specified by a
domain name, class and type. For domain names in the Internet, the class is IN. The type
of query specifies whether an IP address, a mail host, a name server or some other type
of information is required. A special domain, in-addr.arpa, exists to hold IP addresses for
reverse lookups. The class attribute is used to distinguish, for example, the Internet
naming database from other (experimental) DNS naming databases. A set of types is
defined for a given database; those for the Internet database are given in Figure 13.5.
DNSnameservers • The problems of scale are treated by a combination of partitioning
the naming database and replicating and caching parts of it close to the points of need.
The DNS database is distributed across a logical network of servers. Each server holds
part of the naming database –primarily data for the local domain. Queries concerning
computers in the local domain are satisfied by servers within that domain. However,
each server records the domain names and addresses of other name servers, so that
queries pertaining to objects outside the domain can be satisfied.
The DNS naming data are divided into zones. A zone contains the following data:
(cid:129) Attribute data for names in a domain, less any subdomains administered by lower-
level authorities. For example, a zone could contain data for Queen Mary,
University of London – qmul.ac.uk – less the data held by departments (for
example the Department of Computer Science – dcs.qmul.ac.uk).


===== page 597 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 579
(cid:129) The names and addresses of at least two name servers that provide authoritative
data for the zone. These are versions of zone data that can be relied upon as being
reasonably up-to-date.
(cid:129) The names of name servers that hold authoritative data for delegated subdomains;
and ‘glue’ data giving the IP addresses of these servers.
(cid:129) Zone-management parameters, such as those governing the caching and
replication of zone data.
A server may hold authoritative data for zero or more zones. So that naming data are
available even when a single server fails, the DNS architecture specifies that each zone
must be replicated authoritatively in at least two servers.
System administrators enter the data for a zone into a master file, which is the
source of authoritative data for the zone. There are two types of server that are
considered to provide authoritative data. A primary or master server reads zone data
directly from a local master file. Secondary servers download zone data from a primary
server. They communicate periodically with the primary server to check whether their
stored version matches that held by the primary server. If a secondary’s copy is out of
date, the primary sends it the latest version. The frequency of the secondary’s check is
set by administrators as a zone parameter, and its value is typically once or twice a day.
Any server is free to cache data from other servers to avoid having to contact them
when name resolution requires the same data again; it does this on the proviso that
clients are told that such data is non-authoritative as supplied. Each entry in a zone has
a time-to-live value. When a non-authoritative server caches data from an authoritative
server, it notes the time to live. It will only provide its cached data to clients for up to
this time; when queried after the time period has expired, it recontacts the authoritative
server to check its data. This is a useful feature that minimizes the amount of network
traffic while retaining flexibility for system administrators. When attributes are
expected to change rarely, they can be given a correspondingly large time to live. If an
administrator knows that attributes are likely to change soon, they can reduce the time
to live accordingly.
Figure 13.4 shows the arrangement of some of the DNS database as it stood in the
year 2001. This example is equally valid today even if some of the data has altered as
systems have been reconfigured over time. Note that, in practice, root servers such as
a.root-servers.net hold entries for several levels of domain, as well as entries for first-
level domain names. This is to reduce the number of navigation steps required to resolve
domain names. Root name servers hold authoritative entries for the name servers for the
top-level domains. They are also authoritative name servers for the generic top-level
domains, such as com and edu. However, the root name servers are not name servers for
the country domains. For example, the uk domain has a collection of name servers, one
of which is called ns1.nic.net. These name servers know the name servers for the
second-level domains in the United Kingdom such as ac.uk and co.uk. The name servers
for the domain ac.uk know the name servers for all of the university domains in the
country, such as qmul.ac.uk or ic.ac.uk. In some cases, a university domain delegates
some of its responsibilities to a subdomain, such as dcs.qmul.ac.uk.
The root domain information is replicated by a primary server to a collection of
secondary servers, as described above. In spite of this, root servers serve thousands or


===== page 598 =====
580 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Figure 13.4 DNS name servers
a.root-servers.net
(root)
uk
purdue.edu
ns1.nic.uk
(uk) yahoo.com
ns.purdue.edu
(purdue.edu)
co.uk
ns0.ja.net
ac.uk
(ac.uk)
*.purdue.edu
ic.ac.uk
qmul.ac.uk
dcs.qmul.ac.uk *.dcs.qmul.ac.uk *.ic.ac.uk
*.qmul.ac.uk
alpha.qmul.ac.uk dns0.dcs.qmul.ac.uk dns0-doc.ic.ac.uk
(qmul.ac.uk) (dcs.qmul.ac.uk) (ic.ac.uk)
Name server names are in italics, and the corresponding domains are in
parentheses. Arrows denote name server entries
more queries per second. All DNS servers store the addresses of one or more root name
servers, which do not change very often. They also usually store the address of an
authoritative server for the parent domain. A query involving a three-component domain
name such as www.berkeley.edu can be satisfied using at worst two navigation steps:
one to a root server that stores an appropriate name server entry, and a second to the
server whose name is returned.
Referring to Figure 13.4, the domain name jeans-pc.dcs.qmul.ac.uk can be looked
up from within dcs.qmul.ac.uk using the local server dns0.dcs.qmul.ac.uk. This server
does not store an entry for the web server www.ic.ac.uk, but it does keep a cached entry
for ic.ac.uk (which it obtained from the authorized server ns0.ja.net). The server dns0-
doc.ic.ac.uk can be contacted to resolve the full name.
Navigationandqueryprocessing • A DNS client is called a resolver. It is normally
implemented as library software. It accepts queries, formats them into messages in the
form expected under the DNS protocol and communicates with one or more name
servers in order to satisfy the queries. A simple request-reply protocol is used, typically
using UDP packets on the Internet (DNS servers use a well-known port number). The
resolver times out and resends its query if necessary. The resolver can be configured to
contact a list of initial name servers in order of preference in case one or more are
unavailable.


===== page 599 =====
SECTION 13.2 NAME SERVICES AND THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM 581
Figure 13.5 DNS resource records
Record type Meaning Main contents
A A computer address (IPv4) IPv4 number
AAAA A computer address (IPv6) IPv6 number
NS An authoritative name server Domain name for server
CNAME The canonical name for an alias Domain name for alias
SOA Marks the start of data for a zone Parameters governing the zone
Domain name pointer (reverse
PTR Domain name
lookups)
Machine architecture and operating
HINFO Host information
system
MX Mail exchange List of <preference, host> pairs
TXT Text string Arbitrary text
The DNS architecture allows for recursive navigation as well as iterative
navigation. The resolver specifies which type of navigation is required when contacting
a name server. However, name servers are not bound to implement recursive navigation.
As was pointed out above, recursive navigation may tie up server threads, meaning that
other requests might be delayed.
In order to save on network communication, the DNS protocol allows for multiple
queries to be packed into the same request message and for name servers
correspondingly to send multiple replies in their response messages.
Resourcerecords • Zone data are stored by name servers in files in one of several fixed
types of resource record. For the Internet database, these include the types given in
Figure 13.5. Each record refers to a domain name, which is not shown. The entries in the
table refer to items already mentioned, except that AAAA records store IPv6 addresses
whereasA records store IPv4 addresses, and TXT entries are included to allow arbitrary
other information to be stored along with domain names.
The data for a zone starts with an SOA-type record, which contains the zone
parameters that specify, for example, the version number and how often secondaries
should refresh their copies. This is followed by a list of records of type NS specifying
the name servers for the domain and a list of records of type MX giving the domain
names of mail hosts, each prefixed by a number expressing its preference. For example,
part of the database for the domain dcs.qmul.ac.uk at one point is shown in Figure 13.6,
where the time to live 1Dmeans 1 day.
Further records of type A later in the database give the IP addresses for the two
name servers dns0 and dns1. The IP addresses of the mail hosts and the third name server
are given in the databases corresponding to their domains.


===== page 600 =====
582 CHAPTER 13 NAME SERVICES
Figure 13.6 DNS zone data records
domain name time to live class type value
dcs.qmul.ac.uk 1D IN NS dns0
dcs.qmul.ac.uk 1D IN NS dns1
dcs.qmul.ac.uk 1D IN MX 1 mail1.qmul.ac.uk
dcs.qmul.ac.uk 1D IN MX 2 mail2.qmul.ac.uk
The majority of the remainder of the records in a lower-level zone like
dcs.qmul.ac.uk will be of type A and map the domain name of a computer onto its IP
address. They may contain some aliases for the well-known services, for example:
domain name time to live class type value
www 1D IN CNAME traffic
traffic 1D IN A 138.37.95.150
If the domain has any subdomains, there will be further records of type NS specifying
their name servers, which will also have individual A entries. For example, at one point
the database for qmul.ac.uk contained the following records for the name servers in its
subdomain dcs.qmul.ac.uk:
domain name time to live class type value
dcs 1D IN NS dns0.dcs
dns0.dcs 1D IN A 138.37.88.249
dcs 1D IN NS dns1.dcs
dns1.dcs 1D IN A 138.37.94.248
Load sharing by name servers: At some sites, heavily used services such as the Web and
FTP are supported by a group of computers on the same network. In this case, the same
domain name is used for each member of the group. When a domain name is shared by
several computers, there is one record for each computer in the group, giving its IP
address. By default, the name server responds to queries for which multiple records
match the requested name by returning the IP addresses according to a round-robin
schedule. Successive clients are given access to different servers so that the servers can
share the workload. Caching has a potential for spoiling this scheme, for once a non-
authoritative name server or a client has the server’s address in its cache it will continue
to use it. To counteract this effect, the records are given a short time to live.
TheBINDimplementationoftheDNS • The Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) is
an implementation of the DNS for computers running UNIX. Client programs link in
library software as the resolver. DNS name server computers run the named daemon.
