source: Books - all\ref_book1_distributed-and-cloud-computing_kaiHwang.pdf
method: pdf
sha256: 125df2b686d75df4fbc6e447406e1c330bd17f5512b797122baa6546e95c25f4
pages:  671
ocr:    17 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    300
----------------------------------------------------------------------
===== page 401 =====
relational database which provides abundant atomic operations (transactions). Row creation is implicit
upon storing data. Rows are ordered lexicographically, that is, close together lexicographically, usually on
oneor a smallnumber of machines.
Largetablesarebrokenintotabletsatrowboundaries.Atabletholdsacontiguousrangeofrows.Clients
canoftenchooserowkeystoachievelocality.Thesystemaimsforabout100MBto200MBofdatapertablet.
Each serving machine is responsible for about 100 tablets. This can achieve faster recovery times as
100machineseachpickuponetabletfromthefailedmachine.Thisalsoresultsinfine-grainedloadbalan-
cing,thatis,migratingtabletsawayfromtheoverloadedmachine.SimilartothedesigninGFS,amaster
machineinBigTablemakesload-balancingdecisions.
Figure 6.20(b) shows the BigTable system structure. A BigTable master manages and storesthe meta-
data of the BigTable system. BigTable clients use the BigTable client programming library to communicate
with the BigTable master and tablet servers. BigTable relies on a highly available and persistent distributed
lock service calledChubby [76]discussed in Section 6.3.4.
6.3.3.1 Tablet Location Hierarchy
Figure 6.21 shows how to locate the BigTable data starting from the file stored in Chubby. The first
level is a file stored in Chubby that contains the location of the root tablet. The root tablet contains
the location of all tablets in a special METADATA table. Each METADATA tablet contains the
location of a set of user tablets. The root tablet is just the first tablet in the METADATA table, but
is treated specially; it is never split to ensure that the tablet location hierarchy has no more than
three levels.
The METADATA table stores the location of a tablet under a row key that is an encoding of the
tablet’s table identifier and its end row. BigTable includes many optimizations and fault-tolerant
features. Chubby can guarantee the availability of the file for finding the root tablet. The BigTable
master can quickly scan the tablet servers to determine the status of all nodes. Tablet servers use
UserTable 1
Other
METADATA
tablets
Root tablet
(1st METADATA tablet)
Chubby file
. . .
UserTable N
. . .
. . .
. .
.
.
.
.
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. .
.
378 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
. . .
. . .
FIGURE 6.21
TabletlocationhierarchyinusingtheBigTable.


===== page 402 =====
6.4 Programming on Amazon AWS and Microsoft Azure 379
5 servers of a Chubby cell
Client Chubby
application library
. . . RPCs Master
Client Chubby
application library
Client processes
FIGURE6.22
StructureofGoogleChubbyfordistributedlockservice.
compaction to store data efficiently. Shared logs are used for logging the operations of multiple
tablets so as to reduce the log space as well as keep the system consistent.
6.3.4 Chubby, Google’s Distributed Lock Service
Chubby [76] is intended to provide a coarse-grained locking service. It can store small files inside
Chubbystoragewhichprovidesasimplenamespaceasafilesystemtree.ThefilesstoredinChubby
are quite small compared to the huge files in GFS. Based on the Paxos agreement protocol, the
Chubby systemcan be quite reliable despite the failure of any member node.Figure 6.22shows the
overallarchitectureoftheChubbysystem.
Each Chubby cell has five servers inside. Each server in the cell has the same file system
namespace. Clients use the Chubby library to talk to the servers in the cell. Client applications
can perform various file operations on any server in the Chubby cell. Servers run the Paxos
protocol to make the whole file system reliable and consistent. Chubby has become Google’s
primary internal name service. GFS and BigTable use Chubby to elect a primary from redundant
replicas.
6.4 PROGRAMMING ON AMAZON AWS AND MICROSOFT AZURE
In this section, we will consider the programming support in the AWS platform. First we will
review the AWS platform and its updated service offerings. Then we will study the EC2, S3, and
Simple DB services with programming examples. Returning to the programming environment
features in Figures 4.22 and 4.23, Amazon (like Azure) offers a Relational Database Service (RDS)
with a messaging interface sketched in Section 6.1.3. The Elastic MapReduce capability is equiva-
lent to Hadoop running on the basic EC2 offering. Amazon has NOSQL support in SimpleDB
introduced in Section 6.1.3 and discussed in Section 6.4.5. However, Amazon does not directly
support BigTable as described in Section 6.3.4.
Now we will highlight a few more capabilities that are listed in Table 4.6. Amazon offers the
Simple Queue Service (SQS) and Simple Notification Service (SNS), which are the cloud implemen-
tations of services discussed in Sections 5.2 and 5.4.5. Note that brokering systems run very effi-
ciently in clouds and offer a striking model for controlling sensors and giving back-office support


===== page 403 =====
380 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
for a growing number of smartphones and tablets [77]. We further note the auto-scaling and elastic
load balancing services which support related capabilities. Auto-scaling enables you to automatically
scale your Amazon EC2 capacity up or down according to conditions that you define. With auto-
scaling, you can ensure that the number of Amazon EC2 instances you’re using scales up seam-
lessly during demand spikes to maintain performance, and scales down automatically during
demand lulls to minimize cost.
Elastic load balancing automatically distributes incoming application traffic across multiple
Amazon EC2 instances and allows you to avoid nonoperating nodes and to equalize load on func-
tioning images. Both auto-scaling and elastic load balancing are enabled by CloudWatch which
monitors running instances. CloudWatch is a web service that provides monitoring for AWS cloud
resources, starting with Amazon EC2. It provides customers with visibility into resource utilization,
operational performance, and overall demand patterns—including metrics such as CPU utilization,
disk reads and writes, and network traffic.
6.4.1 Programming on Amazon EC2
Amazon was the first company to introduce VMs in application hosting. Customers can rent VMs
instead of physical machines to run their own applications. By using VMs, customers can load any
software of their choice. The elastic feature of such a service is that a customer can create, launch,
and terminate server instances as needed, paying by the hour for active servers. Amazon provides
several types of preinstalled VMs. Instances are often called Amazon Machine Images (AMIs)
which are preconfigured with operating systems based on Linux or Windows, and additional
software.
Table 6.12 defines three types of AMI. Figure 6.24 shows an execution environment. AMIs are
the templates for instances, which are running VMs. The workflow to create a VM is
CreateanAMI→CreateKeyPair→ConfigureFirewall→Launch (6.3)
This sequence is supported by public, private, and paid AMIs shown in Figure 6.24. The
AMIs are formed from the virtualized compute, storage, and server resources shown at the bottom
of Figure 6.23.
Table 6.12 ThreeTypes of AMI
ImageType AMIDefinition
PrivateAMI Imagescreatedbyyou,whichareprivatebydefault.Youcangrantaccesstoother
userstolaunchyourprivateimages.
PublicAMI ImagescreatedbyusersandreleasedtotheAWScommunity,soanyonecanlaunch
instancesbasedonthemandusethemanywaytheylike.AWSlistsallpublicimagesat
http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/kbcategory.jspa?categoryID=171.
PaidQAMI Youcancreateimagesprovidingspecificfunctionsthatcanbelaunchedbyanyone
willingtopayyoupereachhourofusageontopofAmazon’scharges.


===== page 404 =====
6.4 Programming on Amazon AWS and Microsoft Azure 381
Amazon machine image
Public Private Paid
Create Create
AMs AMs AMs an AM key pair
Configure
Launch
firewall
Elastic IP address
Elastic block store
Virtualization layer
Compute Storage Server
FIGURE6.23
AmazonEC2executionenvironment.
Table 6.13 InstanceTypes Availableon AmazonEC2(October 6,2010)
ECUorEC2 Virtual Storage
ComputeInstance MemoryGB Units Cores GB 32/64Bit
Standard:small 1.7 1 1 160 32
Standard:large 7.5 4 2 850 64
Standard:extralarge 15 8 4 1690 64
Micro 0.613 Upto2 OnlyEBS 32or64
High-memory 17.1 6.5 2 420 64
High-memory:double 34.2 13 4 850 64
High-memory:quadruple 68.4 26 8 1690 64
High-CPU:medium 1.7 5 2 350 32
High-CPU:extralarge 7 20 8 1690 64
Clustercompute 23 33.5 8 1690 64
Example 6.9 Use of EC2 Services in the AWS Platform
Table6.13defines theIaaSinstances availableinOctober 2010infive broadclasses:
1. Standard instances are wellsuited for mostapplications.
2. Micro instances provide a small number of consistent CPU resources and allow you to burst CPU
capacity when additional cycles are available. They are well suited for lower throughput applications
and websites thatconsume significant compute cycles periodically.
3. High-memory instances offer large memory sizes for high-throughput applications, including database
and memorycachingapplications.


===== page 405 =====
382 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
Table 6.14 Costof AmazonOn-Demand VMInstant Types (October6,2010)
VMInstanceType Size Linux/UNIXUsage WindowsUsage
Small(default) $0.085perhour $0.12perhour
Standardinstances Large $0.34perhour $0.48perhour
Extralarge $0.68perhour $0.96perhour
Microinstances Micro $0.02perhour $0.03perhour
High-memoryinstances Extralarge $0.50perhour $0.62perhour
Doubleextralarge $1.00perhour $1.24perhour
Quadrupleextralarge $2.00perhour $2.48perhour
Clustercomputeinstances Quadrupleextralarge $1.60perhour Notavailable
4. High-CPUinstances haveproportionallymoreCPUresources thanmemory(RAM) andare wellsuited
forcompute-intensive applications.
5. Cluster compute instances provide proportionally high CPU resources with increased network perfor-
mance and are well suited for high-performance computing (HPC) applications and other demanding
network-boundapplications. Theyuse 10GigabitEthernet interconnections.
ThecostinthethirdcolumnisexpressedintermsofEC2ComputeUnits(ECUs)whereoneECUprovides
theCPUcapacityofa1.0–1.2GHz2007Opteronor2007Xeonprocessor.Thisleadstothecostperhourfor
CPUsshowninTable6.14.Notethatareal-worlduseofEC2mustpayforuseofmanydifferentresources;
theCPUchargeinTable6.14isjustonecomponentandallcharges(whichnaturallychangeoftenandso
thereadershouldgetthelatestvaluesonline)areavailableontheAWSwebsite.
6.4.2 Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3)
Amazon S3 provides a simple web services interface that can be used to store and retrieve any
amount of data, at any time, from anywhere on the web. S3 provides the object-oriented storage
service for users. Users can access their objects through Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)
with either browsers or other client programs which support SOAP. SQS is responsible for ensuring
a reliable message service between two processes, even if the receiver processes are not running.
Figure 6.24 shows the S3 execution environment.
The fundamental operation unit of S3 is called an object. Each object is stored in a bucket and
retrieved via a unique, developer-assigned key. In other words, the bucket is the container of the
object. Besides unique key attributes, the object has other attributes such as values, metadata, and
access control information. From the programmer’s perspective, the storage provided by S3 can be
viewedasaverycoarse-grainedkey-valuepair.Throughthekey-valueprogramminginterface,users
canwrite,read,anddeleteobjectscontainingfrom1 byteto5 gigabytesofdataeach.There aretwo
typesofwebserviceinterfacefortheusertoaccessthedatastoredinAmazonclouds.OneisaREST
(web2.0)interface,andtheotherisaSOAPinterface.HerearesomekeyfeaturesofS3:
(cid:129) Redundant through geographic dispersion.
(cid:129) Designed to provide 99.999999999 percent durability and 99.99 percent availability of objects
over a given year with cheaper reduced redundancy storage (RRS).


===== page 406 =====
6.4 Programming on Amazon AWS and Microsoft Azure 383
User
REST interface SOAP interface
Object
Key
Bucket Value
Meta-data
Access control
Virtualization layer
FIGURE6.24
AmazonS3executionenvironment.
(cid:129) Authentication mechanisms to ensure that data is kept secure from unauthorized access. Objects
can be made private or public, and rights can be granted to specific users.
(cid:129) Per-object URLs and ACLs (access control lists).
(cid:129) Default download protocol of HTTP. A BitTorrent protocol interface is provided to lower costs
for high-scale distribution.
(cid:129) $0.055 (more than 5,000TB) to 0.15 per GB per month storage (depending on total amount).
(cid:129) First 1GB per month input or output free and then $.08 to $0.15 per GB for transfers outside an
S3 region.
(cid:129) There is no data transfer charge for data transferred between Amazon EC2 and Amazon S3
within the same region or for data transferred between the Amazon EC2 Northern Virginia
region and the Amazon S3 U.S. Standard region (as of October 6, 2010).
6.4.3 Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS) and SimpleDB
TheElasticBlockStore(EBS)providesthevolumeblockinterfaceforsavingandrestoringthevirtual
imagesofEC2instances.TraditionalEC2instanceswillbedestroyedafteruse.ThestatusofEC2can
nowbesavedintheEBSsystemafterthemachineisshutdown.UserscanuseEBStosavepersistent
dataandmounttotherunninginstancesofEC2.NotethatS3is“StorageasaService”withamessa-
ging interface. EBS is analogous to a distributed file system accessed by traditional OS disk access
mechanisms. EBS allows you to create storage volumes from 1GB to 1TB that can be mounted as
EC2instances.
Multiple volumes can be mounted to the same instance. These storage volumes behave like raw,
unformatted block devices, with user-supplied device names and a block device interface. You can
create a file system on top of Amazon EBS volumes, or use them in any other way you would use a


===== page 407 =====
384 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
block device (like a hard drive). Snapshots are provided so that the data can be saved incrementally.
This can improve performance when saving and restoring data. In terms of pricing, Amazon provides
a similar pay-per-use schema as EC2 and S3. Volume storage charges are based on the amount of
storage users allocate until it is released, and is priced at $0.10 per GB/month. EBS also charges
$0.10 per 1 million I/O requests made to the storage (as of October 6, 2010). The equivalent of EBS
has been offered in open source clouds such Nimbus.
6.4.3.1 Amazon SimpleDB Service
SimpleDB provides a simplified data model based on the relational database data model. Structured
data from users must be organized into domains. Each domain can be considered a table. The items
are the rows in the table. A cell in the table is recognized as the value for a specific attribute (column
name) of the corresponding row. This is similar to a table in a relational database. However, it is
possible to assign multiple values to a single cell in the table. This is not permitted in a traditional
relational database which wants to maintain data consistency.
Many developers simply want to quickly store, access, and query the stored data. SimpleDB
removestherequirementtomaintaindatabaseschemaswithstrongconsistency.SimpleDBispricedat
$0.140perAmazonSimpleDBMachineHourconsumedwiththefirst25AmazonSimpleDBMachine
Hoursconsumedpermonthfree(asofOctober6,2010).SimpleDB,likeAzureTable,couldbecalled
“LittleTable,”astheyareaimedatmanagingsmallamountsofinformationstoredinadistributedtable;
onecouldsayBigTableisaimedatbasicbigdata,whereas LittleTableisaimedatmetadata.Amazon
Dynamo[78]isanearlyresearchsystemalongthelinesoftheproductionSimpleDBsystem.
6.4.4 Microsoft Azure Programming Support
Section 4.4.4 has introduced the Azure cloud system. In this section, we describe the programming
model in more detail. Some key programming components, including the client development envir-
onment, SQLAzure, and the rich storage and programming subsystems, are shown in Figure 6.25.
We focus on the features of importance in developing Azure programs. First we have the underly-
ing Azure fabric consisting of virtualized hardware together with a sophisticated control environ-
ment implementing dynamic assignment of resources and fault tolerance. This implements domain
name system (DNS) and monitoring capabilities. Automated service management allows service
models to be defined by an XML template and multiple service copies to be instantiated on request.
Whenthesystemisrunning,servicesaremonitoredandonecanaccesseventlogs,trace/debugdata,
performancecounters, IIS web serverlogs, crashdumps, andother logfiles. Thisinformationcanbe
savedinAzurestorage.Notethat thereisnodebuggingcapabilityforrunningcloudapplications,but
debuggingisdonefromatrace.Onecandividethebasicfeaturesintostorageandcomputecapabilities.
The Azure application is linked to the Internet through a customized compute VM called a web role
supportingbasic Microsoft webhosting.SuchconfiguredVMsareoften calledappliances.The other
importantcomputeclass istheworkerrole reflecting the importance incloudcomputingofapoolof
computeresourcesthatarescheduledasneeded.TherolessupportHTTP(S)andTCP.Rolesofferthe
followingmethods:
(cid:129) The OnStart() method which is called by the Fabric on startup, and allows you to perform
initialization tasks. It reports a Busy status to the load balancer until you return true.
(cid:129) The OnStop() method which is called when the role is to be shut down and gives a graceful exit.
(cid:129) The Run() method which contains the main logic.


===== page 408 =====
6.4 Programming on Amazon AWS and Microsoft Azure 385
Other
Live
cloud
services Users
services
Messaging interface
Compute
Load balancer Load balancer
Web Web Web Worker Worker Worker
role 1 role 2 role M role 1 role 2 role M
Storage
File system
Messaging interface
interface
AzureSQL Blobs Queues Tables
Drives
Fabric
Fabric
controller
FIGURE6.25
FeaturesoftheAzurecloudplatform.
As discussed in Chapter 4, the Azure concept of roles is an interesting idea that we can expect
to be expanded in terms of role types and use in other cloud environments. Figure 6.25 shows
that compute roles can be load-balanced, similar to what GAE and AWS clouds have done (see
Section 4.1).
6.4.4.1 SQLAzure
Azure offers a very rich set of storage capabilities, as shown in Figure 6.25. The SQLAzure ser-
vice offers SQL Server as a service and is described in detail in Example 6.10. All the storage
modalities are accessed with REST interfaces except for the recently introduced Drives that are
analogous to Amazon EBS discussed in Section 6.4.3, and offer a file system interface as a dur-
able NTFS volume backed by blob storage. The REST interfaces are automatically associated
with URLs and all storage is replicated three times for fault tolerance and is guaranteed to be
consistent in access.
The basic storage system is built from blobs which are analogous to S3 for Amazon. Blobs are
arranged as a three-level hierarchy: Account → Containers → Page or Block Blobs. Containers are
analogous to directories in traditional file systems with the account acting as the root. The block
blob is used for streaming data and each such blob is made up as a sequence of blocks of up
to 4MB each, while each block has a 64 byte ID. Block blobs can be up to 200GB in size.
Page blobs are for random read/write access and consist of an array of pages with a maximum blob
size of 1TB. One can associate metadata with blobs as <name, value> pairs with up to 8KB
per blob.


===== page 409 =====
386 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
6.4.4.2 Azure Tables
The Azure Table and Queue storage modes are aimed at much smaller data volumes. Queues
provide reliable message delivery and are naturally used to support work spooling between web and
worker roles. Queues consist of an unlimited number of messages which can be retrieved and pro-
cessed at least once with an 8KB limit on message size. Azure supports PUT, GET, and DELETE
message operations as well as CREATE and DELETE for queues. Each account can have any num-
ber of Azure tables which consist of rows called entities and columns called properties.
There is no limit to the number of entities in a table and the technology is designed to scale well
to a large number of entities stored on distributed computers. All entities can have up to 255
general properties which are <name, type, value> triples. Two extra properties, PartitionKey and
RowKey, must be defined for each entity, but otherwise, there are no constraints on the names of
properties—this table is very flexible! RowKey is designed to give each entity a unique label while
PartitionKey is designed to be shared and entities with the same PartitionKey are stored next to
each other; a good use of PartitionKey can speed up search performance. An entity can have, at
most, 1MB storage; if you need large value sizes, just store a link to a blob store in the Table prop-
erty value. ADO.NET and LINQ support table queries.
Example 6.10 SQLAzure Data Services
Azureprovidesasophisticateddatabaseprogramminginterface.(Moredetailscanbefoundinwww.microsoft
.com/azure/sql.mspx).TheSQLAzuredataservicescanbeviewedasmoreofatraditionalrelationaldatabase.
Builtontopofthecurrentmaturecommercialsoftwarepackages,SQLAzurecanbeconsideredahighly
scalable,on-demanddatastorageandqueryprocessingutilityservice.TheserviceinterfaceofSQLAzureis
basedonstandardwebprotocolsandSQLAzuresupportsbothSOAPandREST.Asbasedontherelational
database,thedatamodelprovidedbySQLDataServices(SDS)isricherthanthetwoNOSQLdatamanage-
mentservicesdiscussedearlier(BigTableandSimpleDB).
The data model in SQLAzure includes the concepts of authority, container, and entity, with a flexible
schema. After a user signs up for the data service, she can create an authority which is represented as a
DNS name such as mydomain.data.database.windows.net. Here, mydomain is an authority created by the
user and data.database.windows.net refers to the service. Users can create multiple authorities at any
time. This DNS name will be resolved to a specific IP address and maps to a specific data center. Thus,
an authority as well as its data will be located at a single data center. Under the highest level “authority”
comes the concept of a container. An authority can have multiple containers (or none at all). A container
has itsidentifications whichcanbeused asthe handleto findthe corresponding container inanauthority.
Containersaretheplaceswhereuserscanputtheirdata.JustlikeSimpleDB,userscanbegintoput
datainacontainerwithoutworryingaboutthedataschema.Entitiesaretheunitsthatarestoredinacon-
tainer.Anentitycanstoreanynumberofuser-definedpropertiesandassociatedvalues(i.e.,liketheattri-
butes and values in SimpleDB). There are two different kinds of containers: homogeneous and
heterogeneouscontainers.Ahomogeneouscontainerhasallentitiesofthesametype,likearelationaldata-
basetable.Aheterogeneouscontainerdoesnothavesuchlimitations.Figure6.25showstheseconcepts.
SDS is one of the building blocks of the Azure platform for building cloud applications. It does provide
an enterprise-class data platform. Microsoft has built multiple data centers all over the world to host cloud
applications from third parties. Multiple data centers can give the stored data high availability and security.
Users do not need to worry about loss of data. Another key feature that SQLAzure provides is ease of


===== page 410 =====
6.5 Emerging Cloud Software Environments 387
development.SDS(infact,thetotalAzurePlatform SDK)canbeintegratedwithMicrosoft’spowerfulVisual
Studio development environment. This can greatly improve the effectiveness and efficiency with which
developers canmakecloudapplications.
6.5 EMERGING CLOUD SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENTS
In this section, we will assess popular cloud operating systems and emerging software environ-
ments. We cover the open source Eucalyptus and Nimbus, then examine OpenNebula, Sector/
Sphere, and Open Stack. These environments were introduced in Chapter 3 from a virtualization
perspective. Here, we provide details regarding programming requirements. We will also cover the
Aneka cloud programming tools recently developed at the University of Melbourne.
6.5.1 Open Source Eucalyptus and Nimbus
Eucalyptus is a product from Eucalyptus Systems (www.eucalyptus.com) that was developed out of
a research project at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Eucalyptus was initially aimed at
bringing the cloud computing paradigm to academic supercomputers and clusters. Eucalyptus pro-
vides an AWS-compliant EC2-based web service interface for interacting with the cloud service.
Additionally, Eucalyptus provides services, such as the AWS-compliant Walrus, and a user interface
for managing users and images.
6.5.1.1 Eucalyptus Architecture
The Eucalyptus system is an open software environment. The architecture was presented in a
Eucalyptus white paper [79,80]. Figure 3.31 introduced Eucalyptus from a virtual clustering point
of view. Figure 6.26 shows the architecture based on the need to manage VM images. The system
supports cloud programmers in VM image management as follows. Essentially, the system has been
extended to support the development of both the computer cloud and storage cloud.
6.5.1.2 VM Image Management
Eucalyptus takes many design queues from Amazon’s EC2, and its image management system is no
different.EucalyptusstoresimagesinWalrus,theblockstoragesystemthatisanalogoustotheAmazon
S3 service. As such, any user can bundle her own root file system, and upload and then register this
imageandlinkitwithaparticularkernelandramdiskimage.Thisimageisuploadedintoauser-defined
bucket within Walrus, and can be retrieved anytime from any availability zone. This allows users to
create specialty virtual appliances (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_appliance) and deploy them
withinEucalyptuswithease.TheEucalyptussystemisavailableinacommercialproprietaryversion,as
wellastheopensourceversionwejustdescribed.
6.5.1.3 Nimbus
Nimbus [81,82] is a set of open source tools that together provide an IaaS cloud computing solu-
tion. Figure 6.27 shows the architecture of Nimbus, which allows a client to lease remote resources
by deploying VMs on those resources and configuring them to represent the environment desired


===== page 411 =====
388 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
External
clouds
Management platform
CCLLCC
Virtualized network
Walrus
SC
CC
Virtualized compute Virtualized storage
NC
FIGURE 6.26
TheEucalyptusarchitectureforVMimagemanagement.
(CourtesyofEucalyptusLLC[81])
VMM node
Service node VMM node
Nimbus Control
laaS
Libvirt
HTTP SSH
Xen/KVM
Cumulus
Cloud client storage
VM VM
DHCP server
FIGURE 6.27
Nimbuscloudinfrastructure.
(CourtesyofNimbusProject[82])
[image text] IaaS


===== page 412 =====
6.5 Emerging Cloud Software Environments 389
by the user. To this end, Nimbus provides a special web interface known as Nimbus Web [83]. Its
aim is to provide administrative and user functions in a friendly interface. Nimbus Web is centered
around a Python Django [84] web application that is intended to be deployable completely separate
from the Nimbus service.
As shown in Figure 6.27, a storage cloud implementation called Cumulus [83] has been tightly
integrated with the other central services, although it can also be used stand-alone. Cumulus is com-
patible with the Amazon S3 REST API [85], but extends its capabilities by including features such
as quota management. Therefore, clients such as boto [86] and s2cmd [87], that work against the
S3 REST API, work with Cumulus. On the other hand, the Nimbus cloud client uses the Java
Jets3t library [88] to interact with Cumulus.
Nimbus supports two resource management strategies. The first is the default “resource pool”
mode. In this mode, the service has direct control of a pool of VM manager nodes and it assumes it
can start VMs. The other supported mode is called “pilot.” Here, the service makes requests to a
cluster’s Local Resource Management System (LRMS) to get a VM manager available to deploy
VMs. Nimbus also provides an implementation of Amazon’s EC2 interface [89] that allows users to
use clients developed for the real EC2 system against Nimbus-based clouds.
6.5.2 OpenNebula, Sector/Sphere, and OpenStack
OpenNebula [90,91] is an open source toolkit which allows users to transform existing infrastruc-
ture into an IaaS cloud with cloud-like interfaces. Figure 6.28 shows the OpenNebula architecture
anditsmaincomponents.ThearchitectureofOpenNebula[92]hasbeendesignedtobeflexibleand
modular to allow integration with different storage and network infrastructure configurations, and
hypervisor technologies. Here, the core is a centralized component that manages the VM full
life cycle, including setting up networks dynamically for groups of VMs and managing their sto-
rage requirements, such as VM disk image deployment or on-the-fly software environment
creation.
Another important component is the capacity manager or scheduler. It governs the functional-
ity provided by the core. The default capacity scheduler is a requirement/rank matchmaker. How-
ever, it is also possible to develop more complex scheduling policies, through a lease model and
advance reservations [93]. The last main components are the access drivers. They provide an
abstraction of the underlying infrastructure to expose the basic functionality of the monitoring,
storage, and virtualization services available in the cluster. Therefore, OpenNebula is not tied to
any specific environment and can provide a uniform management layer regardless of the virtuali-
zation platform.
Additionally, OpenNebula offers management interfaces to integrate the core’s functionality
within other data-center management tools, such as accounting or monitoring frameworks. To this
end, OpenNebula implements the libvirt API [94], an open interface for VM management, as well
as a command-line interface (CLI). A subset of this functionality is exposed to external users
through a cloud interface. OpenNebula is able to adapt to organizations with changing resource
needs, including addition or failure of physical resources [95]. Some essential features to support
changing environments are live migration and VM snapshots [90].
Furthermore, when the local resources are insufficient, OpenNebula can support a hybrid cloud
model by using cloud drivers to interface with external clouds. This lets organizations supplement


===== page 413 =====
390 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
Command-line interface Libvirt interface Cloud interface
OpenNebula core Scheduler
Drivers
Virtualization Network Storage External cloud
Xen Fixed IPs NFS EC2 OpenNebula
KVM Range of IPs SCP Elastic hosts
VMWare ...
External
cloud
Local infrastructure
FIGURE 6.28
OpenNebulaarchitectureanditsmaincomponents.
(CourtesyofSotomayor,etal.[94])
their local infrastructure with computing capacity from a public cloud to meet peak demands, or
implement HA strategies. OpenNebula currently includes an EC2 driver, which can submit requests
to Amazon EC2 [89] and Eucalyptus [80], as well as an ElasticHosts driver [96]. Regarding storage,
an Image Repository allows users to easily specify disk images from a catalog without worrying
about low-level disk configuration attributes or block device mapping. Also, image access control is
applied to the images registered in the repository, hence simplifying multiuser environments and
image sharing. Nevertheless, users can also set up their own images.
6.5.2.1 Sector/Sphere
Sector/Sphereisasoftwareplatformthatsupportsverylargedistributeddatastorageandsimplifieddis-
tributed data processing over large clusters of commodity computers, either within a data center or
across multiple data centers. Thesystem consistsof theSectordistributedfile system and the Sphere
parallel data processing framework [97,98]. Sector is a distributed file system (DFS) that can be
deployed overa widearea andallows users to manage large datasets from any location with ahigh-
speednetworkconnection[99].Thefaulttoleranceisimplementedbyreplicatingdatainthefilesystem
andmanagingthereplicas.
Since Sector is aware of the network topology when it places replicas, it also provides better
reliability, availability, and access throughout. The communication is performed using User Data-
gram Protocol (UDP) for message passing and user-defined type (UDT) [100] for data transfer.


===== page 414 =====
6.5 Emerging Cloud Software Environments 391
Security server Master Client Obviously,UDPisfasterthanTCPformessage
passing because it does not require connection
SSL SSL
setup, but it could become a problem if Sector
is used over the Internet. Meanwhile, UDT is
Data a reliable UDP-based application-level data
transport protocol which has been specifically
designedtoenablehigh-speeddatatransferover
wide area high-speed networks [100]. Finally,
the Sector client provides a programming API,
tools, and a FUSE [101] user space file system
Slaves
module.
FIGURE6.29 On the other hand, Sphere is a parallel data
processing engine designed to work with data
TheSector/Spheresystemarchitecture.
managed by Sector. This coupling allows the
(CourtesyofGuandGrossman[102])
system to make accurate decisions about job
scheduling and data location. Sphere provides a programming framework that developers can use to
process data stored in Sector. Thus, it allows UDFs to run on all input data segments in parallel.
Such data segments are processed at their storage locations whenever possible (data locality). Failed
data segments may be restarted on other nodes to achieve fault tolerance. In a Sphere application,
both inputs and outputs are Sector files. Multiple Sphere processing segments can be combined
to support more complicated applications, with inputs/outputs exchanged/shared via the Sector file
system [102].
The Sector/Sphere platform [102] is supported by the architecture shown in Figure 6.29, which
is composed of four components. The first component is the security server, which is responsible
for authenticating master servers, slave nodes, and users. We also have the master servers that can
be considered the infrastructure core. The master server maintains file system metadata, schedules
jobs, and responds to users’ requests. Sector supports multiple active masters that can join and
leave at runtime and can manage the requests. Another component is the slave nodes, where data is
stored and processed. The slave nodes can be located within a single data center or across multiple
data centers with high-speed network connections. The last component is the client component.
This provides tools and programming APIs for accessing and processing Sector data.
Finally, it is worthy to mention that as part of this platform, a new component has been devel-
oped. It is called Space [97] and it consists of a framework to support column-based distributed
data tables. Therefore, tables are stored by columns and are segmented onto multiple slave nodes.
Tables are independent and no relationships between them are supported. A reduced set of SQL
operations is supported, including, but not limited to, table creation and modification, key-value
updates and lookups, and select UDF operations.
6.5.2.2 OpenStack
OpenStack [103] was been introduced by Rackspace and NASA in July 2010. The project is building
an open source community spanning technologists, developers, researchers, and industry to share
resources and technologies with the goal of creating a massively scalable and secure cloud infrastruc-
ture. In the tradition of other open source projects, the software is open source and limited to just
open source APIs such as Amazon.


===== page 415 =====
392 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
Currently, OpenStack focuses on the development of two aspects of cloud computing to address
compute and storage aspects with the OpenStack Compute and OpenStack Storage solutions.
“OpenStack Compute is the internal fabric of the cloud creating and managing large groups of
virtual private servers” and “OpenStack Object Storage is software for creating redundant, scalable
object storage using clusters of commodity servers to store terabytes or even petabytes of data.”
Recently, an image repository was prototyped. The image repository contains an image registration
and discovery service and an image delivery service. Together they deliver images to the compute
service while obtaining them from the storage service. This development gives an indication that
the project is striving to integrate more services into its portfolio.
6.5.2.3 OpenStack Compute
Aspartofitscomputingsupportefforts,OpenStack[103]isdevelopingacloudcomputingfabriccon-
troller,acomponentofanIaaSsystem,knownasNova.ThearchitectureforNovaisbuiltonthecon-
cepts of shared-nothing and messaging-based information exchange. Hence, most communication in
Novaisfacilitatedbymessagequeues.Toprevent blockingcomponents while waiting foraresponse
from others,deferredobjectsareintroduced.Suchobjectsincludecallbacksthatgettriggeredwhen a
response is received. This is very similar to established concepts from parallel computing, such as
“futures,”whichhavebeenusedinthegridcommunitybyprojectssuchastheCoGKit.
To achieve the shared-nothing paradigm, the overall system state is kept in a distributed data
system. State updates are made consistent through atomic transactions. Nova it implemented in
Python while utilizing a number of externally supported libraries and components. This includes
boto, an Amazon API provided in Python, and Tornado, a fast HTTP server used to implement the
S3 capabilities in OpenStack. Figure 6.30 shows the main architecture of Open Stack Compute. In
this architecture, the API Server receives HTTP requests from boto, converts the commands to and
from the API format, and forwards the requests to the cloud controller.
The cloud controller maintains the global state of the system, ensures authorization while inter-
acting with the User Manager via Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), interacts with
User manager (LDAP)
Storage (ATA over Ethernet)
API server Cloud controller <AMQP>
Nodes (Libvirt/kvm)
(Boto)
<HTTP>
S3
(Tornado)
FIGURE 6.30
OpenStackNovasystemarchitecture.TheAMQP(AdvancedMessagingQueuingProtocol)wasdescribedin
Section5.2.


===== page 416 =====
6.5 Emerging Cloud Software Environments 393
the S3 service, and manages nodes, as well as storage workers through a queue. Additionally, Nova
integrates networking components to manage private networks, public IP addressing, virtual private
network (VPN) connectivity, and firewall rules. It includes the following types:
(cid:129) NetworkController manages address and virtual LAN (VLAN) allocations
(cid:129) RoutingNode governs the NAT (network address translation) conversion of public IPs to private
IPs, and enforces firewall rules
(cid:129) AddressingNode runs Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) services for private
networks
(cid:129) TunnelingNode provides VPN connectivity
The network state (managed in the distributed object store) consists of the following:
(cid:129) VLAN assignment to a project
(cid:129) Private subnet assignment to a security group in a VLAN
(cid:129) Private IP assignments to running instances
(cid:129) Public IP allocations to a project
(cid:129) Public IP associations to a private IP/running instance
6.5.2.4 OpenStack Storage
The OpenStack storage solution is built around a number of interacting components and concepts,
including a proxy server, a ring, an object server, a container server, an account server, replication,
updaters, and auditors. The role of the proxy server is to enable lookups to the accounts, containers,
or objects in OpenStack storage rings and route the requests. Thus, any object is streamed to or
from an object server directly through the proxy server to or from the user. A ring represents a
mapping between the names of entities stored on disk and their physical locations.
Separate rings for accounts, containers, and objects exist. A ring includes the concept of using
zones, devices, partitions, and replicas. Hence, it allows the system to deal with failures, and isola-
tion of zones representing a drive, a server, a cabinet, a switch, or even a data center. Weights can
be used to balance the distribution of partitions on drives across the cluster, allowing users to sup-
port heterogeneous storage resources. According to the documentation, “the Object Server is a very
simple blob storage server that can store, retrieve and delete objects stored on local devices.”
Objects are stored as binary files with metadata stored in the file’s extended attributes. This
requires that the underlying file system is built around object servers, which is often not the case
for standard Linux installations. To list objects, a container server can be utilized. Listing of
containers is handled by the account server. The first release of OpenStack “Austin” Compute and
Object Storage was October 22, 2010. This system has a strong developer community.
6.5.3 Manjrasoft Aneka Cloud and Appliances
Aneka (www.manjrasoft.com/) is a cloud application platform developed by Manjrasoft, based in
Melbourne, Australia. It is designed to support rapid development and deployment of parallel and
distributed applications on private or public clouds. It provides a rich set of APIs for transparently
exploiting distributed resources and expressing the business logic of applications by using preferred
programming abstractions. System administrators can leverage a collection of tools to monitor and
control the deployed infrastructure. It can be deployed on a public cloud such as Amazon EC2


===== page 417 =====
accessible through the Internet to its subscribers, or a private cloud constituted by a set of nodes
with restricted access as shown in Figure 6.31.
Aneka acts as a workload distribution and management platform for accelerating applications in
both Linux and Microsoft .NET framework environments. Some of the key advantages of Aneka
over other workload distribution solutions include:
(cid:129) Support of multiple programming and application environments
(cid:129) Simultaneous support of multiple runtime environments
(cid:129) Rapid deployment tools and framework
(cid:129) Ability to harness multiple virtual and/or physical machines for accelerating application
provisioning based on users’ Quality of Service/service-level agreement (QoS/SLA) requirements
(cid:129) BuiltontopoftheMicrosoft.NETframework,withsupportforLinuxenvironmentsthroughMono
Application
Management Administration
studio portal
Design SLA-negotiation Management
APIs
explorer web services web services
Task Thread Map Reduce Other
model model model models
Membership Reservation Storage License
services services services services
Dynamic resource provisioning services
Hardware profile services
.NET@Windows Mono@Linux
Physical machines/virtual machines
Amazon
Private cloud Microsoft Google
IBM
LAN network
Data center
Resistance
Security
394 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
Management kit
Software development kit
Container
Programming models
Foundation services
Accounting
services
Fabric services
Infrastructure
FIGURE 6.31
ArchitectureandcomponentsofAneka.
(CourtesyofRajBuyya,Manjrasoft)
[image text] eslgn
S -negotiation
ccoun Ing
em ers IP
eserva Ion


===== page 418 =====
6.5 Emerging Cloud Software Environments 395
Anekaoffersthreetypesofcapabilitieswhichareessentialforbuilding,accelerating,andmanaging
cloudsandtheirapplications:
1. Build Aneka includes a new SDK which combines APIs and tools to enable users to rapidly
develop applications. Aneka also allows users to build different runtime environments such as
enterprise/private cloud by harnessing compute resources in network or enterprise data centers,
Amazon EC2, and hybrid clouds by combining enterprise private clouds managed by Aneka
with resources from Amazon EC2 or other enterprise clouds built and managed using
XenServer.
2. Accelerate Aneka supports rapid development and deployment of applications in multiple
runtime environments running different operating systems such as Windows or Linux/UNIX.
Aneka uses physical machines as much as possible to achieve maximum utilization in local
environments. Whenever users set QoS parameters such as deadlines, and if the enterprise
resources are insufficient to meet the deadline, Aneka supports dynamic leasing of extra
capabilities from public clouds such as EC2 to complete the task within the deadline (see
Figure 6.32).
Executors
Executor Executor
Scheduler
Private enterprise
network
Internet
Private Publicly available resources
cloud (physical and virtual)
Scheduler
vmware
amazon.com
VPN Executor/schedulers
Client libraries (virtual resources)
Public cloud
FIGURE6.32
Anekausingprivatecloudresourcesalongwithdynamicallyleasedpubliccloudresources.
(CourtesyofRajBuyya,Manjrasoft,www.manjrasoft.com/)
[image text] Ill


===== page 419 =====
396 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
3. Manage Management tools and capabilities supported by Aneka include a GUI and APIs to set
up, monitor, manage, and maintain remote and global Aneka compute clouds. Aneka also has
an accounting mechanism and manages priorities and scalability based on SLA/QoS which
enables dynamic provisioning.
Here are three important programming models supported by Aneka for both cloud and tradi-
tional parallel applications:
1. Thread programming model, best solution to adopt for leveraging the computing capabilities of
multicore nodes in a cloud of computers
2. Task programming model, which allows for quickly prototyping and implementing an
independent bag of task applications
3. MapReduce programming model,as discussed in Section 6.2.2
6.5.3.1 Aneka Architecture
Aneka as a cloud application platform features a homogeneous distributed runtime environment for
applications. This environment is built by aggregating together physical and virtual nodes hosting
the Aneka container. The container is a lightweight layer that interfaces with the hosting environ-
ment and manages the services deployed on a node. The interaction with the hosting platform is
mediated through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL), which hides in its implementation all the
heterogeneity of the different operating systems.
By means of the PAL it is possible to perform all the infrastructure-related tasks, such as perfor-
mance and system monitoring. These activities are vital to ensure the desired QoS for applications.
The PAL, together with the container, represents the hosting environment of services which imple-
ment the core capabilities of the middleware and make it a dynamically composable and extensible
system. The available services can be aggregated into three major categories:
Fabric Services: Fabric services implement the fundamental operations of the infrastructure of
the cloud. These services include HA and failover for improved reliability, node membership
and directory, resource provisioning, performance monitoring, and hardware profiling.
Foundation Services: Foundation services constitute the core functionalities of the Aneka
middleware. They provide a basic set of capabilities that enhance application execution in the
cloud. These services provide added value to the infrastructure and are of use to system
administrators and developers. Within this category we can list storage management, resource
reservation, reporting, accounting, billing, services monitoring, and licensing. Services in this
level operate across the range of supported application models.
Application Services: Application services deal directly with the execution of applications and
are in charge of providing the appropriate runtime environment for each application model.
They leverage foundation and fabric services for several tasks of application execution such as
elastic scalability, data transfer, and performance monitoring, accounting, and billing. At this
level, Aneka expresses its true potential in supporting different application models and
distributed programming patterns.
Each supported application model is managed by a different collection of services that interact
with the underlying layers and services to carry out application execution. In general, the middle-
ware counterpart of each application model features at least two different services: scheduling and


===== page 420 =====
execution. In addition, specific models can require additional services or a different type of support.
Aneka provides support for the most well-known application programming patterns, such as distrib-
uted threads, bags of tasks, and MapReduce.
Additional services can be designed and deployed in the system. This is how the infrastructure is
enriched with additional features and capabilities. The SDK provides straightforward interfaces and
ready-to-use components for rapid service prototyping. Deployment and integration of new services
is painless and immediate: The container leverages the Spring framework and allows for dynamic
integration of new components such as services.
Example 6.11 Aneka Application of Maya Rendering Case Study
Aneka has been used to create several interesting applications in domains such as life sciences,
engineering, and creative media. Applications created using Aneka are able to run on enterprise or pub-
lic clouds unchanged. We will briefly discuss a case study on high-speed rendering of engineering
designs using Aneka software. To reduce this time, GoFront has used Aneka and created an enterprise
cloud (Figure 6.33) within its company by utilizing networked PCs. GoFront Group, a unit of China
Southern Railways, is China’s premier and largest nationwide researcher and manufacturer of rail elec-
tric traction equipment.
Aneka Maya renderer
Use private
Aneka cloud
Setup 2: Aneka
enterpraise cloud
Setup 1: Single server
Using Maya
graphical mode
directly
four-core
server
emiT
)srh
ni(
6.5 Emerging Cloud Software Environments 397
Go front private Aneka
cloud
LAN network
(Running Maya batch mode on demand)
80 75 6000 Frames
60 4000 Frames
2000 Frames
50
40
25
20
Raw locomotive design files 108
(using/autodesk Maya) 0 3.3
Single Aneka
server cloud
Aneka utilizes idle desktops
(3D) to decrease tasktime
from days to hours
FIGURE6.33
RenderingimagesoflocomotivedesignonGoFront’sprivatecloudusingAneka.
(CourtesyofRajBuyya,Manjrasoft)


===== page 421 =====
398 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
The GoFront Group is responsible for designing the high-speed electric locomotive, metro car, urban
transportation vehicle, and motor train. The raw design of the prototypes requires high-quality 3D images
using Autodesk’s Maya rendering software. By examining the 3D images, engineers identify problems in
the original design and make the appropriate design improvements. However, such designs on a single
four-core servertook threedaysto renderscenes with 2,000frames.
To reduce this time, GoFront used Aneka and created an enterprise cloud by utilizing networked PCs.
It used Aneka Design Explorer, a tool for rapid creation of parameter sweep applications in which the
same program is executed many times on different data items (in this case, executing Maya for rendering
different images). A customized Design Explorer (called Maya GUI) has been implemented for Maya
rendering. MayaGUI managed parameters, generated Aneka tasks, monitored submitted Aneka tasks, and
collectedfinal renderedimages.Thedesignimageusedtotakethreedaystorender(2,000+frames, each
frame with more than five different camera angles). Using only a 20-node Aneka cloud, GoFront was able
to reduce therendering timefrom threedaysto threehours.
6.5.3.2 Virtual Appliances
Machine virtualization offers a unique opportunity to break software dependencies between applica-
tions and their hosting environments. In recent years, resource virtualization has been witnessing a
renaissance fueled by efficient, freely available VM monitors for commodity systems (e.g., Xen,
VMware Player, KVM, and VirtualBox) and backed by the microprocessor industry (e.g., Intel and
AMD virtualization extensions). Modern system VMs provide improved flexibility, security, isola-
tion, and resource control, while supporting a wealth of unmodified applications, making a compel-
ling case for their use in grid computing. Grid applications also require network connectivity, and
the increasing use of NAT and IP firewalls breaks the original model of each node in the Internet
being a peer, and is recognized as a hindrance to programming and deploying grid computing
systems.
InAneka,VMsandP2Pnetworkvirtualizationtechnologiescanbeintegratedintoself-configuring,
prepackaged “virtual appliances” to enable simple deployment of homogeneously configured virtual
clusters across a heterogeneous, wide-area distributed system. Virtual appliances are VM images
that are installed and configured with the entire software stack (including OS, libraries, binaries,
configuration files, and auto-configuration scripts) that is required for a given application to work
“out-of-the-box’’ when the virtual appliance is instantiated. Compared to traditional approaches of
softwaredistribution,virtualapplianceshavethebenefitofsignificantlyreducingsoftwaredependence
onthehostingenvironment.
VM conversion tools exist for most VMMs and standardization efforts that are underway will
further facilitate interoperation across VMMs, such that appliance instantiation across multiple
platforms should be seamless. Wide-area overlays of virtual appliances aggregate the capacity of
commodity hardware and can be programmed and managed as a local area network—even though
nodes may be distributed across multiple network domains. The preconfigured Grid Appliance
image (www.grid-appliance.org) can encapsulate complex distributed system software in a manner
that is transparent to users for easy deployment. Grid appliances run on free VMMs available for
modern commodity servers and desktops.


===== page 422 =====
References 399
6.6 BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES AND HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Detailed references for coretechnologieshave been given throughoutthischapter,andherewe give
some additional useful references. Most of the topics are so new that there are few comprehensive
treatments, and links for major commercial clouds are changing at this time of rapid evolution;
werecommendcheckingmajorsitesforlatestlinks.Asampleis[104–108].Averygoodintroduction
to cloudcomputinginbusiness and technology isgiven in the lecture notes by Chou [109]. Various
cloud services are treated in [110–115]. Arguments about the benefits and opportunities of
cloud computing are treated in [110,116–120]. Cloud technology for HPC was studied in
[28,43,73,121–127].Distributedprogrammingparadigmsforcloudapplicationsaretreatedin[26,28].
Applicationsofcloudstodata-intensivecomputingarediscussedin[25,41–43,74,75].
Acknowledgement
This chapter was coauthored by Geoffrey Fox of Indiana University and Albert Zomaya of Sydney
University, Australia. Their work was assisted by Kang Chen (Tsinghua University, China), Judy
Qiu, Gregor von Laszewski, Javier Diaz, Archit Kulshrestha, and Andrew Younge (Indiana Univer-
sity), Reza Moravaeji and Javid Teheri (University of Sydney), and Renato Figueiredo (University
of Florida). Rajkumar Buyya (University of Melbourne) has contributed Section 6.5.3. Kai Hwang
(USC) edited the final manuscript.
References
[1]C. Dabrowski, Reliability in grid computing systems, Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exper. 21 (8) (2009)
927–959.
[2]Microsoft, Project Trident: A Scientific Workflow Workbench, http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/
collaboration/tools/trident.aspx,2010.
[3]W. Lu, J. Jackson, R. Barga, AzureBlast: A case study of developing science applications on the cloud,
in: ScienceCloud: 1st Workshop on Scientific Cloud Computing co-located with HPDC (High Perfor-
manceDistributed Computing),ACM, Chicago, IL, 21June2010.
[4]Distributed Systems Laboratory (DSL) at University of Chicago Wiki. Performance Comparison: Remote
Usage,NFS,S3-fuse, EBS. 2010.
[5]D. Jensen, Blog entry on Compare Amazon S3 to EBS data read performance, http://jensendarren
.wordpress.com/2009/12/30/compare-amazon-s3-to-ebs-data-read-performance/,2009.
[6]ZendPHPCompany,TheSimpleCloudAPIforStorage,QueuesandTable,http://www.simplecloud.org/
home,2010.
[7]Microsoft, Windows Azure Geo-location Live, http://blogs.msdn.com/b/windowsazure/archive/2009/04/
30/windows-azure-geo-location-live.aspx,2009.
[8]Raytheon BBN, SHARD (Scalable, High-Performance, Robust and Distributed) Triple Store based on
Hadoop. http://www.cloudera.com/blog/2010/03/how-raytheon-researchers-are-using-hadoop-to-build-a-
scalable-distributed-triple-store/,2010.
[9]NOSQLMovement, Wikipedia list of resources,http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL,2010.
[10]NOSQLLinkArchive, LISTOFNOSQL DATABASES, http://nosql-database.org/,2010.


===== page 423 =====
400 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
[11]F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W.C. Hsieh, D. Wallach, M. Burrows, et al., BigTable: A distributed
storage system for structured data, in: OSDI’06: Seventh Symposium on Operating System Design and
Implementation, USENIX, Seattle, WA,2006.
[12]Amazon, Welcome to Amazon SimpleDB, http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AmazonSimpleDB/latest/
DeveloperGuide/index.html,2010.
[13]J.Haridas,N.Nilakantan,B.Calder,WindowsAzureTable,http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?LinkId=153401,
2009.
[14]International Virtual Observatory Alliance, VOTable Format Definition Version 1.1, http://www.ivoa.net/
Documents/VOTable/20040811/,2004.
[15]Apache Incubator, Heart (Highly Extensible & Accumulative RDF Table) planet-scale RDF data
store and a distributed processing engine based on Hadoop & Hbase, http://wiki.apache.org/incubator/
HeartProposal, 2010.
[16]M. King, Amazon SimpleDB and CouchDB Compared, http://www.automatthew.com/2007/12/amazon-
simpledb-and-couchdb-compared.html,2007.
[17]Apache, Hbaseimplementation ofBigTable onHadoop File System,http://hbase.apache.org/,2010.
[18]Apache, TheCouchDB document-oriented databaseproject, http://couchdb.apache.org/index.html,2010.
[19]M/Gateway Developments Ltd, M/DB Open Source “plug-compatible” alternative to Amazon’s
SimpleDB database, http://gradvs1.mgateway.com/main/index.html?path=mdb,2009.
[20]ActiveMQ, http://activemq.apache.org/,2009.
[21]S. Pallickara, G. Fox, NaradaBrokering: a distributed middleware framework and architecture for
enabling durable peer-to-peer grids, in: ACM/IFIP/USENIX 2003 International Conference on Middle-
ware,RiodeJaneiro, Brazil, Springer-Verlag,New York,Inc.,2003.
[22]NaradaBrokering, Scalable Publish SubscribeSystem,http://www.naradabrokering.org/,2010.
[23]Apache Hadoop,http://hadoop.apache.org/,2009.
[24]J. Ekanayake, A.S. Balkir, T. Gunarathne, G. Fox, C. Poulain, N. Araujo, et al., DryadLINQ for scienti-
fic analyses,in: Fifth IEEEInternational Conference oneScience,Oxford,2009.
[25]J.Ekanayake,T.Gunarathne,J.Qiu,G.Fox,S.Beason,J.Y.Choi,etal.,Applicability ofDryadLINQto
Scientific Applications, CommunityGrids Laboratory,IndianaUniversity, 2009.
[26]M. Isard, M. Budiu, Y. Yu, A. Birrell, D. Fetterly, Dryad: Distributed data-parallel programs from
sequential buildingblocks, in:ACM SIGOPS Operating SystemsReview, ACM Press,2007.
[27]Y. Yu, M. Isard, D. Fetterly, M. Budiu, U. Erlingsson, P.K. Gunda, et al., DryadLINQ: A System for
General-Purpose Distributed Data-Parallel Computing Using a High-Level Language, in: Symposium on
Operating SystemDesign andImplementation (OSDI), 2008.
[28]J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, MapReduce: simplified data processing on large clusters, Commun. ACM 51 (1)
(2008)107–113.
[29]J. Ekanayake, H. Li, B. Zhang, T. Gunarathne, S. Bae, J. Qiu, et al., Twister: a runtime for iterative
MapReduce, in: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on MapReduce and Its Applications of
ACM HPDC2010conference, ACM,Chicago, IL, 20–25June2010.
[30]T. Gunarathne, T. Wu, J. Qiu, G. Fox, MapReduce in the Clouds for Science, in: CloudCom, IUPUI
Conference Center, Indianapolis,30November–3December 2010.
[31]R.S. Dorward, R. Griesemer, S. Quinlan, Interpreting the data: parallel analysis with Sawzall, Scientific
Prog. J.13 (4) (2005) 227–298 (Special Issueon Grids and Worldwide Computing Programming Models
andInfrastructure).
[32]Pig! Platform for analyzing large data sets, http://hadoop.apache.org/pig/, 2010.
[33]C. Olston, B. Reed, U. Srivastava, R. Kumar, A. Tomkins, Pig Latin: a not-so-foreign language for data
processing, in: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, ACM,Vancouver, Canada,2008, pp.1099–1110.


===== page 424 =====
References 401
[34]G.Malewicz,M.H.Austern,A.Bik,J.Dehnert,I.Horn,N.Leiser,etal.,Pregel: asystemforlarge-scale
graph processing, in: Proceedings of the twenty-first annual symposium on parallelism in algorithms and
architectures,ACM, Calgary, Canada,2009, p.48.
[35]Cloudera, CDH: A free, stable Hadoop distribution offering RPM, Debian, AWS and automatic config-
urationoptions.http://www.cloudera.com/hadoop/,2010.
[36]A. Grama, G. Karypis, V. Kumar, A. Gupta, Introduction to Parallel Computing, second ed., Addison
Wesley,2003.
[37]J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters, in: Sixth Symposium
onOperating Systems DesignandImplementation, 2004,pp.137–150.
[38]H. Kasim, V. March, R. Zhang, S. See, Survey on Parallel Programming Model, in: IFIP International
Conference on Network and Parallel Computing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5245,
Springer-Verlag,Shanghai,China, 2008, pp.266–275.
[39]S. Hariri, M. Parashar, Tools and Environments for Parallel and Distributed Computing, Series on
Parallel andDistributed Computing,Wiley, 2004,ISBN:978-0471332886.
[40]L.Silva, R.Buyya, Parallel Programming Models andParadigms,(2007).
[41]T. Gunarathne, T. Wu, J. Qiu, G. Fox, Cloud Computing Paradigms for Pleasingly Parallel Biomedical
Applications, in: Proceedings of the Emerging Computational Methods for the Life Sciences Workshop
ofACM HPDC 2010conference,Chicago, IL, 20–25June2010.
[42]G. Fox, MPI and MapReduce, in: Clusters, Clouds, and Grids for Scientific Computing CCGSC, Flat
Rock, NC, http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/presentations/CCGSC-Sept8-2010.pptx, 8 September
2010.
[43]J. Ekanayake, X. Qiu, T. Gunarathne, S. Beason, G. Fox, High Performance Parallel Computing with
Clouds and Cloud Technologies, Cloud Computing and Software Services: Theory and Techniques, CRC
Press(TaylorandFrancis), 2010.
[44]T. Hoefler, A. Lumsdaine, J. Dongarra, Towards Efficient MapReduce Using MPI, in: Recent Advances
in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface, Lecture Notes in Computer Science: vol.
5759,SpringerVerlag, EspooFinland, 2009,pp.240–249.
[45]S. Ibrahim, H. Jin, B. Cheng, H. Cao, S. Wu, L. Qi, CLOUDLET: towards mapreduce implementation
on virtual machines, in: Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Symposium on High Performance
Distributed Computing,ACM,Garching, Germany,2009, pp.65–66.
[46]T. Sandholm, K. Lai, MapReduce optimization using regulated dynamic prioritization, in: Proceedings of
the eleventh international joint conference on measurement and modeling of computer systems, ACM,
Seattle,WA,2009, pp.299–310.
[47]Wikipedia,MapReduce, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce, 2010(accessed06.11.10).
[48]J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters, in: Presentation at
OSDI-2004 Conference. http://labs.google.com/papers/mapreduce-osdi04-slides/index.html, 2004
(accessed6.11.10).
[49]R. Lammel, Google’s MapReduce programming model – Revisited, Sci. Comput. Prog. 68 (3) (2007)
208–237.
[50]M. Zaharia, A. Konwinski, A.D. Joseph, R. Katz, I. Stoica, Improving MapReduce performance in het-
erogeneous environments, in: Proceedings of the 8th USENIX conference on operating systems design
andimplementation, USENIXAssociation, SanDiego, California, 2008,pp. 29–42.
[51]N. Vasic, M. Barisits, V. Salzgeber, D. Kostic, Making cluster applications energy-aware, in: Proceed-
ings of the 1st workshop on automated control for datacenters and clouds, ACM, Barcelona, Spain,
2009, pp. 37–42.
[52]D.J. DeWitt, E. Paulson, E. Robinson, J. Naughton, J. Royalty, S. Shankar, et al., Clustera: an integrated
computationanddata management system, in:Proc. VLDB Endow, 2008,1(1), pp.28–41.


===== page 425 =====
402 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
[53]S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, S. Leung, The Google File System, in: 19th ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles,2003, pp.20–43.
[54]Google, Introduction to Parallel Programming and MapReduce, http://code.google.com/edu/parallel/
mapreduce-tutorial.html,2010.
[55]J. Ekanayake, H. Li, B. Zhang, T. Gunarathne, S. Bae, J. Qiu, et al., Twister: a runtime for iterative
MapReduce, in: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on MapReduce and Its Applications of
ACM HPDC2010Conference, ACM,Chicago, IL, 20–25June2010.
[56]B. Zhang, Y. Ruan, T. Wu, J. Qiu, A. Hughes, G. Fox, Applying Twister to Scientific Applications, in:
CloudCom2010, IUPUIConference Center, Indianapolis,30November–3 December 2010.
[57]G. Malewicz, M.H. Austern, A. Bik, J.C. Dehnert, I. Horn, N. Leiser, et al., Pregel: A System for Large-
Scale GraphProcessing, in: International conference on management of data, Indianapolis, Indiana, 2010,
pp.135–146.
[58]Y. Bu, B. Howe, M. Balazinska, M.D. Ernst, HaLoop: Efficient Iterative Data Processing on Large
Clusters, in: The 36th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, VLDB Endowment, Vol. 3,
Singapore, 13–17September2010.
[59]M.Zaharia,M.Chowdhury,M.J.Franklin,S.Shenker,I.Stoica,Spark:ClusterComputingwithWorking
Sets,in:2ndUSENIXWorkshoponHotTopicsinCloudComputing(HotCloud’10),Boston,22June
2010.
[60]SALSAGroup,Iterative MapReduce, http://www.iterativemapreduce.org/,2010.
[61]Yahoo,Yahoo! Hadoop Tutorial,http://developer.yahoo.com/hadoop/tutorial/index.html,2010.
[62]G. Coulouris, J. Dollimore, T. Kindberg, Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design. International Com-
puter ScienceSeries, 4th ed.,Addison-Wesley, 2004.
[63]T. White,Hadoop: TheDefinitive Guide, Second ed.,Yahoo Press,2010.
[64]Apache, HDFSOverview, http://hadoop.apache.org/hdfs/,2010.
[65]Apache, HadoopMapReduce, http://hadoop.apache.org/mapreduce/docs/current/index.html,2010.
[66]J.Venner, ProHadoop,firsted.,Apress, 2009,ISBN:978-1430219422.
[67]Apache! Pig! (part of Hadoop),http://pig.apache.org/,2010.
[68]A. Choudhary, G. Fox, S. Hiranandani, K. Kennedy, C. Koelbel, S. Ranka, et al., Unified compilation of
Fortran77D and90D,ACM Lett.Program. Lang.Syst.2 (1–4) (1993)95–114.
[69]Yahoo,Pig! Tutorial. http://developer.yahoo.com/hadoop/tutorial/module6.html#pig.
[70]Systems@ETH Zurich, Massively Parallel Data Analysis with MapReduce. Lectures on MapReduce,
Hadoop and Pig Latin. http://www.systems.ethz.ch/education/past-courses/hs08/map-reduce/map-reduce/
lecture-slides,2008(accessed 07.11.10).
[71]G.Fox, R.D.Williams, P.C. Messina,Parallel computing works!Morgan KaufmannPublishers, 1994.
[72]J. Ekanayake, T. Gunarathne, J. Qiu, G. Fox, S. Beason, J. Choi, et al., Applicability of DryadLINQ to
Scientific Applications, Community Grids Laboratory, Indiana University, http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/
ptliupages/publications/DryadReport.pdf,2010.
[73]J. Qiu, J. Ekanayake, T. Gunarathne, J. Choi, S. Bae, Y. Ruan, et al., Data Intensive Computing
for Bioinformatics, http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/publications/DataIntensiveComputing_
BookChapter.pdf, 2009.
[74]J. Ekanayake, T. Gunarathne, J. Qiu, Cloud Technologies for Bioinformatics Applications, IEEE Trans.
Parallel Distrib.Syst., (2010).
[75]J. Qiu, T. Gunarathne, J. Ekanayake, J. Choi, S. Bae, H. Li, et al., Hybrid Cloud and Cluster Computing
Paradigms for Life Science Applications, in: 11th Annual Bioinformatics Open Source Conference
BOSC, Boston, 9–10July2010.
[76]M. Burrows, The Chubby Lock Service for Loosely-Coupled Distributed Systems, in: OSDI’06:
Seventh Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation, USENIX, Seattle, WA, 2006,
pp. 335–350.


===== page 426 =====
References 403
[77]G.C. Fox, A. Ho, E. Chan, W. Wang, Measured characteristics of distributed cloud computing infrastruc-
ture for message-based collaboration applications, in: Proceedings of the 2009 International Symposium
onCollaborative TechnologiesandSystems, IEEEComputerSociety, 2009, pp.465–467.
[78]G.DeCandia,D.Hastorun,M.Jampani,G.Kakulapati,A.Lakshman,A.Pilchin,etal.,Dynamo:Amazon’s
highlyavailablekey-valuestore,SIGOPSOper.Syst.Rev.41(6)(2007)205–220.
[79]EucalyptusLLC, White Papers. http://www.eucalyptus.com/whitepapers.
[80]D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, et al., The Eucalyptus Open-
Source Cloud-Computing System, in: 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing
andtheGrid, CCGRID ’09,Shanghai,18–21May2009,pp. 124–131.
[81]K.Keahey, I. Foster, T. Freeman, X. Zhang, Virtual workspaces: achieving quality of service and quality
oflife in theGrid, Scientific Prog. J.13(4) (2005)265–275.
[82]Nimbus,Cloudcomputing for science, http://www.nimbusproject.org, 2010.
[83]Nimbus,Frequently AskedQuestions, http://www.nimbusproject.org/docs/current/faq.html,2010.
[84]Django,High-Level PythonWebFramework, http://www.djangoproject.com/,2010.
[85]Amazon, Simple Storage Service API Reference: API Version 2006-03-01, http://awsdocs.s3.amazonaws
.com/S3/latest/s3-api.pdf,2006.
[86]boto,Pythoninterface to Amazon WebServices, http://code.google.com/p/boto/,2010.
[87]S3tools project, Open source tools for accessing Amazon S3 – Simple Storage Service, http://s3tools.org/
s3tools, 2010.
[88]bitbucket, JetS3t: open-source Java toolkit and application suite for Amazon Simple Storage Service
(Amazon S3), Amazon CloudFront content delivery network, and Google Storage. http://bitbucket.org/
jmurty/jets3t/wiki/Home.
[89]Amazon,Amazon Elastic ComputeCloud(Amazon EC2).http://aws.amazon.com/ec2.
[90]OpenNebula, industrystandard open sourcecloud computingtool. http://opennebula.org/.
[91]I.M. Llorente, R. Moreno-Vozmediano, R.S. Montero, Cloud Computing for On-Demand Grid Resource
Provisioning, in: Advances in Parallel Computing: High Speed and Large Scale Scientific Computing
vol.18,IOS Press, 2009,pp.177–191.
[92]R. Monteroa, R. Moreno-Vozmediano, I. Llorente, An elasticity model for high throughput computing
clusters, J.Parallel Distrib. Comput.(May) (2010).
[93]B. Sotomayor, R.S. Montero, I.M. Llorente, I. Foster, Capacity Leasing in Cloud Systems Using the
OpenNebula Engine, in: 2008 Workshop on Cloud Computing and Its Applications (CCA08), Chicago,
IL,2008, http://www.cca08.org/papers/Paper20-Sotomayor.pdf.
[94]libvirt,virtualization API.http://libvirt.org.
[95]B. Sotomayor, R.S. Montero, I.M. Llorente, I. Foster, Virtual infrastructure management in private and
hybridclouds, IEEEInternet Comp. 13(5) (2009)14–22.
[96]ElasticHosts, Flexible servers inthe cloud. http://www.elastichosts.com/.
[97]Sector/Sphere, High Performance Distributed File System and Parallel Data Processing Engine. http://
sector.sourceforge.net.
[98]Y. Gu, R. Grossman, Sector/Sphere: A Distributed Storage and Computing Platform. SC08 Poster, http://
sector.sourceforge.net/pub/sector-sc08-poster.pdf,2008.
[99]Y. Gu, R. Grossman, Lessons learned from a year’s worth of benchmarks of large data clouds, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Many-Task Computing on Grids and Supercomputers, ACM, Portland,
Oregon,2009,pp. 1–6.
[100]Y. Gu, R. Grossman, UDT: UDP-based data transfer for high-speed wide area networks, Comput. Netw.
51(7) (2007)1777–1799.
[101]FUSE,Filesystemin Userspace. http://fuse.sourceforge.net.
[102]Y. Gu, R.L. Grossman, Sector and sphere: the design and implementation of a high-performance data
cloud,Phil.Trans. R. Soc. A367(2009)2429–2445.


===== page 427 =====
404 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
[103]Open Stack,Open Source,Open StandardsCloud, http://openstack.org/index.php,2010.
[104]VSCSE, Big Data for Science. Virtual Summer School hosted by SALSA group at Indiana University,
26July–30July2010, http://salsahpc.indiana.edu/tutorial/.
[105]T. Hey, The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery, http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/
um/redmond/events/TonyHey/21216/player.htm, 2010.
[106]T. Hey, S. Tansley, K. Tolle, The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery, http://research
.microsoft.com/en-us/collaboration/fourthparadigm/, 2009(accessed07.11.10).
[107]SALSA Group, Catalog of Cloud Material, http://salsahpc.indiana.edu/content/cloud-materials,
2010.
[108]Microsoft Research, Cloud Futures Workshop, http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/events/cloudfu-
tures2010/default.aspx,2010.
[109]T. Chou, Introduction to Cloud Computing: Business and Technology, Active Book Press, LLC, 2010,
p.252, http://www.lulu.com/items/volume_67/8215000/8215197/1/print/8215197.pdf.
[110]R. Buyya, C. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, I. Brandic, Cloud computing and emerging IT platforms:
vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 5th utility, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 25 (6)
(2009)599–616.
[111]P. Chaganti, Cloud computing with Amazon Web Services, Part 1: Introduction — When it’s
smarter to rent than to buy, http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/architecture/library/ar-cloudaws1/,
2008.
[112]Cloud computing with Amazon Web Services, Part 2: Storage in the cloud with Amazon Simple Storage
Service (S3) – Reliable, flexible, and inexpensive storage and retrieval of your data, http://www.ibm
.com/developerworks/architecture/library/ar-cloudaws2/,2008.
[113]P. Chaganti, Cloud computing with Amazon Web Services, Part 3: Servers on demand with EC2, http://
www.ibm.com/developerworks/architecture/library/ar-cloudaws3/,2008.
[114]M.R.Palankar,A.Iamnitchi,M.Ripeanu,S.Garfinkel,AmazonS3forsciencegrids:aviablesolution?in:
Proceedingsofthe2008InternationalWorkshoponData-awareDistributedComputing,ACM,Boston,MA,
2008,pp.55–64.
[115]W. Sun, K. Zhang, S. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Liang, Software as a Service: An Integration Perspective, in:
Fifth International Conference Service-Oriented Computing – ICSOC, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science,Vol. 4749,Springer Verlag, Vienna Austria,2007, pp.558–569.
[116]G. Lakshmanan, Cloud Computing. Relevance to Enterprise, http://www.infosys.com/cloud-computing/
white-papers/Documents/relevance-enterprise.pdf,2009.
[117]N.Leavitt, Iscloud computing really readyfor prime time?Computer 42(1) (2009)15–20.
[118]G. Lin, G. Dasmalchi, J. Zhu, Cloud Computing and IT as a Service: Opportunities and Challenges, in:
WebServices, ICWS ’08,IEEE, Beijing, 23–26September2008.
[119]D.S. Linthicum, Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in Your Enterprise: A Step-by-Step Guide,
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2009.
[120]L. Mei, W.K. Chan, T.H. Tse, A Tale of Clouds: Paradigm Comparisons and Some Thoughts on
Research Issues, in: Asia-Pacific Services Computing Conference. APSCC ’08 IEEE, Yilan, Taiwan,
9–12December 2008, pp.464–469.
[121]G. Fox, S. Bae, J. Ekanayake, X. Qiu, H. Yuan, Parallel Data Mining from Multicore to Cloudy Grids,
book chapter of High Speed and Large Scale Scientific Computing, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2009, http://
grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/publications/CetraroWriteupJune11-09.pdf.
[122]J. Ekanayake, G. Fox, High Performance Parallel Computing with Clouds and Cloud Technologies, in:
First International Conference CloudComponCloudComputing, Munich,Germany, 2009.
[123]F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W.C. Hsieh, D.A. Wallach, M. Burrows, et al., BigTable: a distributed
storage system forstructured data, ACM Trans. Comput.Syst. 26(2) (2008)1–26.


===== page 428 =====
Homework Problems 405
[124]E. Deelman, G. Singh, M. Livny, B. Berriman, J. Good, The cost of doing science on the cloud: the
Montage example, in: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing, IEEE Press,
Austin,Texas,2008, pp.1–12, http://www.csd.uwo.ca/faculty/hanan/cs843/papers/ewa-ec2.pdf.
[125]C. Hoffa, G. Mehta, T. Freeman, E. Deelman, K. Keahey, B. Berriman, et al., On the Use of Cloud
Computing for Scientific Workflows, in: Proceedings of the 2008 Fourth IEEE International Conference
oneScience, IEEEComputerSociety, 2008, pp.640–645.
[126]N. Paton, A. Marcelo, T. De Aragão, K. Lee, A. Alvaro, R. Sakellariou, Optimizing utility in cloud
computing through autonomic workload execution, Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical
Committee on Data Engineering, http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~alvaro/publications/TCDEBull09.pdf,
2009.
[127]B. Rochwerger, et al., The Reservoir model and architecture for open federated cloud computing, IBM
J.Res. Dev.53(4)(2009) 4:1–4:11.
HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Problem 6.1
Visit the Google App Engine (GAE) web site, download the SDK, and read the Python Guide or
the Java Guide to get started. Note that GAE only accepts Python, Ruby, and Java programming
languages. The platform does not provide any IaaS services.
a. Develop a specific cloud application using available software services such as Gmail, Docs, or
CRM on the GAE platform. Test your applications on the GAE platform.
b. Report your application development experience and experimental results in terms of some
selected performance measures such as job queuing time, execution time, resource utilization
rate, or some QoS attributes such as goal achievement, success rate, fault tolerance, and cost-
effectiveness.
c. Change the problem size or data set size and platform configuration to study the scalability and
efficiency issues in your GAE experiments.
Problem 6.2
Write an application code to run on the GAE platform for backup storage of a large amount of
your personal, family, or company data and records such as photos, video, music, sales receipts,
documents, news media, inventory, market records, financial matters, supply chain information,
human resources, public data sets, and so forth. Note that strict privacy protection is required
here. Minimizing the storage cost is another objective function to achieve. The access path, soft-
ware development tools, and platform information in using GAE can be found in Chapter 4. You
should explain your code development experience and report the results in using the GAE
platform.
Problem 6.3
Get set up to use Amazon Web Services; perhaps use the capability Amazon provides at http://aws.
amazon.com/education/ for instructors to obtain details to arrange free education accounts for their


===== page 429 =====
406 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
students. Test the AWS platform for a SimpleDB application using the relational database service.
This application could be similar to that chosen for Problems 6.1 and 6.2. You should study the
system’s performance, scalability, throughput, efficiency, resource utilization, fault tolerance, and
cost-effectiveness.
Problem 6.4
Design and request an EC2 configuration on the AWS platform for parallel multiplication of two
very large matrices with an order exceeding 50,000.
a. Report your experimental results including execution time, speed performance, VM instances
initiated, compute unit and storage utilization, and service charge experienced.
b. You can also study related issues such as scalability, throughput, efficiency, resource utilization,
fault tolerance, and cost-effectiveness in this scientific cloud experiment.
Problem 6.5
Repeat Problem 6.4 on the AWS platform for an Amazon S3 application. This application could be
similar to that chosen for Problems 6.1–6.2. You can also study the performance, scalability,
throughput, efficiency, resource utilization, fault tolerance, cost-effectiveness, and related issues.
Problem 6.6
Study some reported EC2 or S3 applications on the AWS platform by business or service indus-
try or by large enterprises. Many examples or success stories are told in Chou’s book [109]. For
example, Vertica Systems applies EC2 in DBMS (database management system) applications. Eli
Lilly uses EC2 in drug development. Animoto offers an online service to facilitate personal video
production. Contact a few of those service companies for technical implementation and service
details. Submit a study report with suggestions on improving the selected compute and storage
service applications.
Problem 6.7
Visit the Microsoft Windows Azure Developer Center. You can download the Azure development
kit to run a local version of Azure. Design an application experiment and test it on a local compu-
ter, such as your desktop, or a notebook computer, or a university workstation or server. Report
your experiment experiences in using the Azure platform.
Problem 6.8
In the MapReduce programming model, there is a special case concerning implementing only the
map phase, which is also known as a “map-only” problem. This achievement can enhance existing
applications/binaries to have high throughput by running them in a parallel fashion; in other words,
it helps stand-alone programs to utilize large-scale computing capability. The goal of this exercise is
towriteaHadoop“map-only”programwiththebioinformaticsapplicationBLAST(NCBIBLAST+;


===== page 430 =====
Homework Problems 407
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/executables/blast+/2.2.23/) under a Linux/UNIX environment using
Twister.
Basically,the BLASTbinary isinvoked withinthe scopeofa“map-only”programoneach map
task with assigned input. Here, the assigned input is the map task key-value pair. It may include
contentoftheoriginalinput,apathtotheinputfile,oranyothermetadataregardingthenatureofthe
binary.Then,eachmaptaskpassesthisinputtotheexternalbinaryduringruntime.This“map-only”
programterminatesafteralltheinputshavebeenprocessed.
MapOnly(<key,value>){
input->keyValueModification(<key,value>);
output->invokeBlastBinary(input);
returnfinish}
With the given pseudocode, you need to implement the map() interface within RunnerMap.java
(http://salsahpc.indiana.edu/tutorial/source_code/Hadoop-Blast-sketch.zip), which executes an exter-
nal Java process to run the stand-alone BLAST for each map task with the assigned input query.
The “input.fa” needs to be split into chunks (chunk[1-n].fa) as a set of input queries. This set of
queries is stored on the local disk; you may need to upload them to HDFS before the Hadoop
BLAST program executes. The HDFS directory name is one of the program parameters. Then, the
Hadoop framework assigns an input query, formed as a <key,value> pair such as <filename,file
path on HDFS>, to each worker.
The code of <key,value> generation is done if you use the provided DataFileInputFormat.java
and FileRecordReader.java files as the InputFormatClass. The BLAST binary requires a database
to find matching hits regarding the input queries. This database can be either stored in a shared
file system or located on the local disk using distributed cache; it depends on how you write the
program. Either one of the solutions is acceptable. For the final step, collect the result from each
mapper and merge them into a single output result.fa file. In addition, select a proper version of
the BLAST+ binary (32-bit or 64-bit) regarding the Linux OS version (i686/i386 or x86_64).
For further suggestions, see the SalsaHPC Hadoop BLAST Tutorial with the pseudocode (http://
salsahpc.indiana.edu/tutorials/hadoopblast.html).
Problem 6.9
Visit the Manjrasoft Aneka Software Center at www.manjrasoft.com/. Download the Aneka soft-
ware and create an enterprise cloud using LAN-connected PCs in your university/student laboratory,
and run various example applications that come with Aneka. Write simple parallel programs using
Aneka’s Task, Thread, and MapReduce programming models and carry out their execution on
workers ranging from 2 to 20 in steps of 2.
Problem 6.10
Repeat applications in Problems 6.1–6.5 using the academic/open source packages described in
Section 6.5—namely Eucalyptus, Nimbus, OpenStack, OpenNebula, and Sector/Sphere. This soft-
ware is available on the FutureGrid web site (http://www.futuregrid.org) and includes a growing
number of tutorials.


===== page 431 =====
408 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
Problem 6.11
Test the large-scale matrix multiplication program of Problem 6.4 on two or three cloud performs
(GAE, AWS, and/or Azure). You can also choose a data-intensive application such as a large-scale
search or business processing application. Implement the application on at least two or all three
cloud platforms, separately. The major objective is to minimize the execution time of the applica-
tion. The minor objective is to minimize the user service costs.
a. Run the service on the GAE platform.
b. Run the service on the AWS platform.
c. Run the service on the Windows Azure platform.
d. Compare your compute and storage costs, design experiences, and experimental results on all
three cloud platforms. Report the relative performance and QoS results measured.
Problem 6.12
There are three implementations of the MapReduce engine and its extensions: Google MapReduce,
Apache Hadoop, and Microsoft Dryad. Complete the missing 14 entries to show their similarities
and differences in 6 technical dimensions. 4 entries are already given below as example answers.
You do not have explain the table entries in detail, just enter the names of languages, models, meth-
ods, mechanisms, and platforms applied.
Programming ApacheHadoop
Environment GoogleMapReduce MapReduce MicrosoftDryad
Codinglanguageand
programmingmodelused
Mechanismsfordata Shareddirectoriesand
handling localdisks
Failurehandlingmethods Re-executefailedtasks
andduplicatedexecution
oftheslowtasks
High-levellanguagefor
dataanlysis
OSandclusterenvironment WindowsHPCScluster
Intermediatedatatransfer Byfiletransferor
method usingthehttplinks
Problem 6.13
UsingaMapReduceprogrammingmodelsupportedinAneka,developaprogramforimagefiltering
ofhundreds of photosyou have taken usinga digitalcamera. Conductand reporttheresults of your
scalability experiments by varying the number of computing nodes/workers and images of different
resolutionsorfilesizeonanAneka-basedenterprisecloud.


===== page 432 =====
Homework Problems 409
Problem 6.14
Examine the tutorials at http://www.futuregrid.org/tutorials and compare the word count application
on Hadoop using Eucalyptus, Nimbus, and at least one other of OpenStack, OpenNebula, or Sector/
Sphere.
Problem 6.15
Examine the tutorials at http://salsahpc.indiana.edu and http://www.iterativemapreduce.org/samples.
html. Compare Hadoop and Twister on cases specified by the instructor from examples given there.
Discuss their relative strengths and weaknesses.
Problem 6.16
The following program is written in Hadoop, namely WebVisCounter. Trace through the program
or run it on a cloud platform to which you have access. Analyze the programming tasks performed
by this Hadoop program and learn from using Hadoop library.
importjava.io.IOException;
importorg.apache.hadoop.fs.Path;
importorg.apache.hadoop.io.IntWritable;
importorg.apache.hadoop.io.Text;
importorg.apache.hadoop.mapred.FileInputFormat;
importorg.apache.hadoop.mapred.FileOutputFormat;
importorg.apache.hadoop.mapred.JobClient;
importorg.apache.hadoop.mapred.JobConf;
staticclassOSCountMapper
extendsMapper<LongWritable,Text,Text,IntWritable>{
publicvoidmap(LongWritablekey,Textvalue,Contextcontext)
throwsIOException,InterruptedException{
TextUserInfo=newText();
TextOSversion=newText();
intStartIndex,EndIndex,i;
Stringline=value.toString();
StringTokenizertokenizer=newStringTokenizer(line);
while(tokenizer.hasMoreTokens()&&i!=8){
i++;UserInfo.set(tokenizer.nextToken())}
i=0;
while(UserInfo.charAt(i)!=';'){
if(UserInfo.charAt(i)!='('){StartIndex=i}
i++};
EndIndex=i;
OSversion=UserInfo.subtring(StartIndex,EndIndex);
output.collect(OSversion,one)};};


===== page 433 =====
410 CHAPTER 6 Cloud Programming and Software Environments
staticclassOSCountReduce
extendsReducer<Text,IntWritable,Text,IntWritable>{
publicvoidreduce(Textkey,Iterable<IntWritable>values,
Contextcontext){intsum=0;
while(values.hasNext()){sum+=values.next().get()};
output.collect(key,newIntWritable(sum)); );
}
publicstaticvoidmain(String[]args)throwsException{
JobConfconf=newJobConf(WordCount.class);
conf.setJobName(''OSCount'');
conf.setOutputKeyClass(Text.class);
conf.setOutputValueClass(IntWritable.class);
conf.setMapperClass(Map.class);
conf.setCombinerClass(Reduce.class);
conf.setReducerClass(Reduce.class);
conf.setInputFormat(TextInputFormat.class);
conf.setOutputFormat(TextOutputFormat.class);
FileInputFormat.setInputPaths(conf,newPath(args[0]));
FileOutputFormat.setOutputPath(conf,newPath(args[1]));
JobClient.runJob(conf);};
}
Problem 6.17
Twister K-means extends the MapReduce programming model iteratively. Many data analysis
techniques require iterative computations. For example, K-means clustering is the application where
multiple iterations of MapReduce computations are necessary for overall computation. Twister is an
enhanced MapReduce runtime that supports iterative MapReduce computations efficiently. For this
problem, study the iterative MapReduce programming model and learn how to implement the
K-means algorithm with Twister.
Problem 6.18
DryadLINQ PageRank is a well-known link analysis algorithm. It calculates numerical values to
each element of a hyperlinked set of web pages, which reflects the probability that the random sur-
fer will access that page. Implementing PageRank with MapReduce is of some difficulty in both
efficiency and programmability due to both the iterative structure and the random access model in
large-scale web graphs. DryadLINQ provide the SQL-like queries API that helps programmers
implement PageRank without much effort. In addition, the Dryad infrastructure helps to scale the
application out in an easy way. Learn how to implement a simple PageRank application with
DryadLINQ.


===== page 434 =====
Homework Problems 411
Problem 6.19
UsingathreadprogrammingmodelsupportedinAneka,developaprogramforparallelmultiplication
oftwoverylargesquarematricesonanordergreaterthan500.Conductandreporttheresultsofyour
scalabilityexperimentsbyvaryingtheorderofthematrixfrom500to1,000instepsof100oncom-
putingnodes/workersvaryingfrom10to50instepsof10inanAneka-basedenterprisecloud.
Problem 6.20
Compare Pig Latin and “bare” Hadoop for implementing data intensive application specified by
your instructor. Discuss their relative advantages and shortcomings.


===== page 435 =====  [ocr]
This page intentionally left blank


===== page 436 =====
PART
3
Grids, P2P, and the Future Internet
ThreechaptersinPart3lookintothefuturetrendsofnetwork-baseddistributedcomputing.Chapter7
coverscomputationalgridsanddatagrids,includingmajornationalgridsbuiltintheUS,Europe,and
China. We study peer-to-peer (P2P) overlay networks and examine real P2P systems built in recent
years. Finally, we present sensor networks and radio-frequency identification (RFID) and global
positioningsystems(GPS)forbuilding the InternetofThings(IoT). Socialnetworksare assessedin
web-scale service applications. We examine ubiquitous grids, P2P systems, and clouds for future
Internetapplications.
CHAPTER 7: GRID COMPUTING SYSTEMS AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
We study the design principles, platform architecture, middleware support, resource management, and
service standards in computing/data grids. A dozen grid architectures and their software environments
are reviewed, including the TeraGrid, EGEE, DataGrid, ChinaGrid, BOINC, and Grid’5000, among
others. Several grid middleware packages: Condor-G, SGE, Globus Toolkit, and CGSP are detailed.
We also assess security infrastructure needed for trusted grid computing. We present an adaptive
method for workload characterization and performance prediction in large-scale grid computing. Past
and current grid projects are assessed against the emerging technologies.
This chapter is authored by Yongwei Wu and Kai Hwang. Rajkumar Buyya has contributed
Section 7.3.4. Technical assistance was extended from Weimin Zheng and Zhiwei Xu.
CHAPTER 8: PEER-TO-PEER COMPUTING AND OVERLAY NETWORKS
P2P overlay networks are built over a large number of client computers through virtual networking
over the Internet. We present unstructured, structured, and hybrid overlay networks. Distributed
hash tables (DHTs) are studied for fast routing and locality preservation operations. Fault tolerance
and churn resilience are studied to improve dependability. P2P networks are used for distributed file
sharing and content distribution applications. Trust management and copyright protection are studied
with reputation systems and content poisoning techniques. Examples illustrate the P2P design
principles and the protocols applied.
This chapter is authored by Zhenyu Li and Kai Hwang with technical assistance from Gaogang
Xie of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
413


===== page 437 =====
414 PART 3 Grids, P2P, and the Future Internet
CHAPTER 9: UBIQUITOUS CLOUDS AND THE INTERNET OF THINGS
The future trends of clouds and Internet computing are assessed in this final chapter. We evaluate
system performance and assure security of open network systems. We examine some public and
private clouds built by IBM, Salesforce, SGI, Manijarsoft, NASA, and CERN. We report some
benchmark results and representative applications of grids and clouds and their variants. We study
the Internet of Things with the enabling technologies in sensing networks, RFID tracking and global
positioning systems. We assess web-scale social networks and their impacts on the future Internet to
be populated with inter-clouds, coordinated data centers, and large-scale social services.
This chapter is primarily authored by Kai Hwang with partial contributions by Judy Qiu
(Sections 9.2.1 and 9.2.5). The material development was also assisted by Vikram Dixit, Zhongyuan
Qin, and Kaikun Dong at the University of Southern California.


===== page 438 =====
CHAPTER
7
Grid Computing Systems and
Resource Management
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Summary...........................................................................................416
7.1 GridArchitecture andService Modeling.........................................................416
7.1.1 GridHistory andService Families...................................................416
7.1.2 CPUScavenging andVirtual Supercomputers........................................419
7.1.3 Open GridServices Architecture (OGSA).............................................422
7.1.4 Data-Intensive Grid ServiceModels.................................................425
7.2 GridProjects andGrid Systems Built.............................................................427
7.2.1 National GridsandInternational Projects............................................428
7.2.2 NSFTeraGrid in theUnited States..................................................430
7.2.3 DataGrid in theEuropeanUnion....................................................431
7.2.4 TheChinaGrid DesignExperiences..................................................434
7.3 GridResource Management andBrokering.......................................................435
7.3.1 Resource Management andJobScheduling..........................................435
7.3.2 GridResource Monitoring withCGSP................................................437
7.3.3 ServiceAccounting andEconomyModel.............................................439
7.3.4 Resource Brokering withGridbus....................................................440
7.4 SoftwareandMiddleware forGrid Computing....................................................443
7.4.1 Open Source GridMiddleware Packages.............................................444
7.4.2 TheGlobus Toolkit Architecture (GT4)...............................................446
7.4.3 Containers andResources/Data Management.........................................450
7.4.4 TheChinaGrid SupportPlatform(CGSP).............................................452
7.5 GridApplication TrendsandSecurity Measures..................................................455
7.5.1 GridApplications and TechnologyFusion............................................456
7.5.2 GridWorkload andPerformance Prediction..........................................457
7.5.3 Trust Modelsfor GridSecurity Enforcement..........................................461
7.5.4 Authenticationand Authorization Methods...........................................464
7.5.5 GridSecurity Infrastructure (GSI)...................................................466
7.6 BibliographicNotes andHomeworkProblems....................................................470
Acknowledgments..................................................................................471
References.........................................................................................471
Homework Problems................................................................................473
DistributedandCloudComputing 415
©2012Elsevier,Inc.Allrightsreserved.


===== page 439 =====
416 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
SUMMARY
This chapter is devoted to building grid systems for distributed computing over an integrated
network of supercomputers, server clusters, and data centers. First we examine the open grid service
architecture. We study a dozen grid architectures and their software environments including the
TeraGrid, EGEE, DataGrid, ChinaGrid, BOINC, and Grid’5000, etc. These case studies illustrate
grid design principles, service models, and implementation technologies. Several grid middleware
packages: Condor-G, SGE, Globus Toolkit and CGSP are detailed. Finally, we cover grid trends
and security infrastructure. Past and current grid projects are reviewed against emerging
technologies.
7.1 GRID ARCHITECTURE AND SERVICE MODELING
The grid is a metacomputing infrastructure that brings together computers (PCs, workstations, server
clusters, supercomputers, laptops, notebooks, mobile computers, PDAs, etc.) to form a large collec-
tion of compute, storage, and network resources to solve large-scale computation problems or to
enable fast information retrieval by registered users or user groups. The coupling between hardware
and software with special user applications is achieved by leasing the hardware, software, middle-
ware, databases, instruments, and networks as computing utilities. Good examples include the rent-
ing of expensive special-purpose application software on demand and transparent access to human
genome databases.
The goal of grid computing is to explore fast solutions for large-scale computing problems. This
objective is shared by computer clusters and massively parallel processor (MPP) systems we have
learned about in Chapter 2. However, grid computing takes advantage of the existing computing
resources scattered in a nation or internationally around the globe. In grids, resources owned by dif-
ferent organizations are aggregated together and shared by many users in collective applications.
Grids rely heavy use of LAN/WAN resources across enterprises, organizations, and governments.
The virtual organizations or virtual supercomputers are new concept derived from grid or cloud
computing. These are virtual resources dynamically configured and are not under the full control of
any single user or local administrator.
7.1.1 Grid History and Service Families
Network-based distributed computing becomes more and more popular among the Internet users.
Recall that the Internet was developed in the 1980s to provide computer-to-computer connections
using the telnet:// protocol. The web service was developed in the 1990s to establish direct linkage
between web pages using the http:// protocol. Ever since the 1990s, grids became gradually avail-
able to establish large pools of shared resources. The approach is to link many Internet applications
across machine platforms directly in order to eliminate isolated resource islands. We may invent
upgraded protocols in the future like “grid://” and “cloud://” to realize this dream of a socialized
cyberspace with greater resource sharing.
The idea of the grid was pioneered by Ian Foster, Carl Kesselman and Steve Tuecke in a 2001
paper [16]. With is ground work, they are often recognized as the fathers of the grids. The Globus


===== page 440 =====
7.1 Grid Architecture and Service Modeling 417
Table 7.1 Four GridFamilies Identifiedin theGreat GlobalGrid(GGG) (Forbes, 2001)
GridFamily RepresentativeGridSystemsandReferences
ComputationalGrids TeraGrid(US),EGEE(EU),DataGrid(EU),Grid’5000(france),ChinaGrid(China),
orDataGrids NAS(NASA),LCG(Cern),e-Science(UK),D-Grid(Nordic),FutureGrid(US),etc.
InformationGridsor SemanticGrid,OntologyPlatform,BOINC(Berkeley),D4Science,Einsten@Home,
KnowledgeGrids InformationPowerGrid(NASA)
BusinessGrids BEinGrid(EU),HPeSpeak,IBMWebSphere,SunGridEngine,Microsoft.NET,etc.
P2P/VolunteerGrids SETI@Home,ParasicGrid,FightAIDS@Home,Foldong@Home,GIMPS,etc.
Project supported by DARPA has promoted the maturity of grid technology with a rich collection
of software and middleware tools for grid computing. In 2007, the concept of cloud computing was
thrown out, which in many ways was extending grid computing through virtualized data centers. In
this beginning section, we introduce major grid families and review the grid service evolution over
the past 15 years.
Grids differ from conventional HPC clusters. Cluster nodes are more homogeneous machines
that are better coordinated to work collectively and cooperatively. The grid nodes are heterogeneous
computers that are more loosely coupled together over geographically dispersed sites. In 2001,
ForbesMagazineadvocatedtheemergenceofthegreatglobalgrid(GGG)asanewglobalinfrastruc-
ture. This GGG evolved from the World Wide Web (WWW) technology we have enjoyed for many
years. Four major families of grid computing systems were suggested by the Forbes GGG categori-
zationassummarizedinTable7.1.Wewillstudysomeofthelistedgridsinsubsequentsections.
7.1.1.1 Four Grid Service Families
Most of today’s grid systems are called computational grids or data grids. Good examples are the
NSF TeraGrid installed in the United States and the DataGrid built in the European Union. Informa-
tion or knowledge grids post another grid class dedicated to knowledge management and distributed
ontology processing. The Semantic web, also known as semantic grids, belongs to this faimly.
Ontology platform falls into information or knowledge grids. Other information/knowledge grids
include the Berkeley BOINC and NASA’s Information Power Grid.
In the business world, we see a family, called business grids, built for business data/information
processing. These are represented by the HP eSpeak, IBM WebSphere, Microsoft .NET, and Sun
One systems. Some business grids are being transformed into Internet clouds. The last grid class
includes several grid extensions such as P2P grids and parasitic grids. This chapter will concentrate
mainly in computational or data grids. Business grids are only briefly introduced. We will further
compare grids with P2P networks and P2P grids in Chapter 8.
7.1.1.2 Grid Service Protocol Stack
To put together the resources needed in a grid platform, a layered grid architecture is shown in
Figure 7.1. The top layer corresponds to user applications to run on the grid system. The user appli-
cations demand collective services including collective computing and communications. The next
layer is formed by the hardware and software resources aggregated to run the user applications
under the collective operations. The connectivity layer provides the interconnection among drafted


===== page 441 =====
418 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Application
Application
Collective services
Resource services
Transport (TCP)
Connectivity services
Network (IP)
Grid fabric Physical links
Grid service protocol stack Internet protocol
FIGURE 7.1
ThelayeredgridserviceprotocolsandtheirrelationshipwiththeInternetserviceprotocols.
(CourtesyofFoster,Kesselman,andTuecke[11])
Table 7.2 Control Operations andEnquiries forAggregating Grid Resources
Resources ControlOperations Enquiries
Compute Starting,monitoring,andcontrollingthe Hardwareandsoftwarecharacteristics;
resources executionofresultantprocesses;control relevantloadinformation:currentloadand
overresources:advancereservation queuestate
Storage Puttingandgettingfiles;controlover Hardwareandsoftwarecharacteristics;
resources resourcesallocatedtodatatransfers: relevantloadinformation:availablespace
advancereservation andbandwidthutilization
Network Controloverresourcesallocated Networkcharacteristicsandload
resources
Code Managingversionedsourceandobject Softwarefilesandcompilesupport
repositories code
Service Implementingcatalogqueryandupdate Serviceorderinformationandagreements
catalogs operations:arelationaldatabase
resources. This connectivity could be established directly on physical networks or it could be built
with virtual networking technology.
The connectivity must support the grid fabric, including the network links and virtual private
channels. The fabric layer includes all computational resources, storage systems, catalogs, network
resources, sensors, and their network connections. The connectivity layer enables the exchange of
data between fabric layer resources. The five-layer grid architecture is closely related to the layered
Internet protocol stack shown on the right-hand side of Figure 7.1. The fabric layer corresponds to
the link layer in the Internet stack. The connectivity layer is supported by the network and transport
layers of the Internet stack. The Internet application layer supports the top three layers.
7.1.1.3 Grid Resources
Table 7.2 summarizes typical resources that are required to perform grid computing. Many existing
protocols (IP, TCP, HTTP, FTP, and DNS) or some new communication protocols can be used to


===== page 442 =====
7.1 Grid Architecture and Service Modeling 419
route and transfer data. The resource layer is responsible for sharing single resources. An interface
is needed to claim the static structure and dynamic status of local resources. The grid should be
able to accept resource requests, negotiate the Quality of Service (QoS), and perform the operations
specified in user applications.
The collective layer handles the interactions among a collection of resources. This layer
implements functions such as resource discovery, co-allocation, scheduling, brokering, monitoring,
and diagnostics. Other desired features include replication, grid-enabled programming, workload
management, collaboration, software discovery, access authorization, and community accounting
and payment. The application layer comprises mainly user applications. The applications interact
with components in other layers by using well-defined APIs (application programming interfaces)
and SDKs (software development kits).
7.1.2 CPU Scavenging and Virtual Supercomputers
In this section, we characterize the process of grid resource aggregation from local and remote
sources. Then we link the grid to the concept of virtual organizations in a dynamic sense. In fact,
the distinction between grids and clouds becomes blurred in recent years. Traditionally, grids were
formed with allocated resources statically, while clouds were formed with provisioned resources
dynamically. As virtualization is applicable to grid components, some grids involving data centers
become more like clouds.
Foster, et al. [15] have compared the grid problem with the anatomy problem in biology. The
application users expect grids to be designed as flexible, secure, and coordinated resources shared
by individuals, institutions, and virtual organizations. The grid resources could come from two pos-
sible sources. On the one hand, large-scale HPC grids can be formed with computers from
resource-rich supercomputer centers owned by government agencies and research institutions. Alter-
natively, one could form “virtual” grids, casually, out of a large number of small commodity com-
puters owned by ordinary citizens, who volunteer to share their free cycles with other users for a
noble cause.
7.1.2.1 CPU Scavenging and Virtual Supercomputers
Both public and virtual grids can be built over large or small machines, that are loosely coupled
together to satisfy the application need. Grids differ from the conventional supercomputers in many
ways in the context of distributed computing. Supercomputers like MPPs in the Top-500 list are
more homogeneously structured with tightly coupled operations, while the grids are built with het-
erogeneous nodes running non-interactive workloads. These grid workloads may involve a large
number of files and individual users. The geographically dispersed grids are more scalable and
fault-tolerant with significantly lower operational costs than the supercomputers.
The concept of creating a “grid” from the unused resources in a network of computers is known
as CPU scavenging. In reality, virtual grids are built over large number of desktop computers by
using their free cycles at night or during inactive usage periods. The donors are ordinary citizens on
a voluntary participation basis. In practice, these client hosts also donate some disk space, RAM,
and network bandwidth in addition to the raw CPU cycles. At present, many volunteer computing
grids are built using the CPU scavenging model. The most famous example is the SETI@Home
[37], which applied over 3 million computers to achieve 23.37 TFlpos as of Sept. 2001. More


===== page 443 =====
420 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
recent examples include the BOINC [7] and Folding@Home [14], etc. In practice, these virtual
grids can be viewed as virtual supercomputers.
Example 7.1 BOINC: Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing
BOINC is an open infrastructure for running volunteer computing projects. It is an active grid research
project conducted at the University of California, Berkeley (http://boinc.berkeley.edu/). The BOINC offers
anopen-sourcesoftwarefor volunteercomputingandgridcomputing. Theideaistouseidletimesonpar-
ticipants’ computers collectively for noblecauses or for academic research purposes. These user hostsrun
with the popular Windows, Mac, or Linux OS to execute many useful applications to cure diseases, study
global warming, discoverpulsesand domanyothermeaningful scientific research projects.
AsreportedinApril7,2011,therewere321,471volunteersintheBOINCprojectcontributing516,440
computers.Witha24-houraverage,5.634PFlopswasachievedcollectively.GridcomputingwithBOINCmay
involvescientists,universities,andcompaniescollectively.Atpresent,theBOINCprojectcoversthefollowing
publicgridservices:messageboards,emaillists,papersandtalks,helpwanted,softwaredevelopment,etc.
Asof2011,over6.2millionmachinesrunningtheBOINCplatformaremembersoftheWorldCommunity
Grid,whichexceededthefastestsupercomputer(Tianhe-1A)in2011.Similarly,theFolding@Homeproject
hasreported5PFlopsperformanceover350,000machines,asofMarch7,2009[14].
7.1.2.2 Grid Resource Aggregation
During the resource aggregation process for grids or clouds, several assumptions are made. First, the
compute nodes and other necessary resources for grids do not join or leave the system incidentally,
except when some serious faults occur in the grid. Second, cloud resources are mostly provisioned
from large data centers. Since security and reliability are very tight in these data centers, resource
behavior is not predictable. Third, although resources in P2P systems are casually allocated, we can
build P2P grids for distributed file sharing, content delivery, gaming, and entertainment applications.
The joining or leaving of some peers has little impact on the needed functions of a P2P grid system.
We envision the grid resource aggregation process in a global setting. Hardware, software, data-
base,andnetworkresourcesaredenotedbyR’sandarescatteredallovertheworld.Theavailability
and specification of these open resources is provided by Grid Information Service (GIS) agencies.
Thegridresourcebrokersassistuserswithfeestoallocateavailableresources.Multiplebrokerscould
competetoserveusers.Also,multipleGISesmayoverlapintheirresourcecoverage.Newgridappli-
cations are enabled after the coupling of computer databases, instruments, and human operators
neededin their specific applications.Itshouldbe noted thattoday’s gridcomputing applicationsare
no longer restricted to using HPC systems. HTC systems, like clouds, are even more in demand in
businessservices.
7.1.2.3 Virtual Organization
The grid is a distributed system integrated from shared resources to form a virtual organization
(VO). The VO offers dynamic cooperation built over multiple physical organizations. The virtual
resources contributed by these real organizations are managed autonomously. The grid must deal
with the trust relationship in a VO. The applications in a grid vary in terms of workload and


===== page 444 =====
7.1 Grid Architecture and Service Modeling 421
resource demand. A flexible grid system should be designed to adapt to varying workloads.
In reality, physical organizations include a real company, a university, or a branch of government.
These real organizations often share some common objectives.
For example, several research institutes and hospitals may undertake some joint research
challenges together to explore a new cancer drug. Another concrete example is the joint venture
among IBM, Apple, and Motorola to develop PowerPC processors and their supporting software
in the past. The joint venture was based on the VO model. Grids definitely can promote the
concept of VOs. Still, joint ventures demand resources and labor from all participants. The
following example shows how two VOs or grid configurations can be formed out of three physi-
cal organizations.
Example 7.2 Dynamic Formation of Virtual Organizations
A new drug development subject needs the molecular simulation software from a research institute and
the clinic database from a hospital. At the same time, computer scientists need to perform biological
sequence analysis on Linux clusters in a supercomputing center. The members from three organizations
contribute all or part of their hardware or software resources to form a VO, as illustrated in Figure 7.2.
Here weshowhow twoVOs areformed outof threephysical organizations labeled “A,”“B,”and“C.”
Each physical organization owns some resources, such as computers, storage, instruments, and data-
bases.The threeorganizations cooperate withoneanother toperform in twotasks: newjumbojetdevelop-
ment and new drug exploration. Each physical organization contributes some of its resources to form a VO
labeled “X” for drug development and another VO labeled “Y” for aircraft development. Physical organiza-
tions mayallocate theirresources asavailableto a VOonly under light workloadconditions.
The owners can also modifythe number of cluster servers to be allocated to a specific VO. The partici-
pants join or leave the VO dynamically under special service agreement. A new physical organization may
Virtual organization Virtual organization
X Actual organization Y
A
Actual Actual
organization organization
B C
Actual Virtual
organization organization
FIGURE7.2
TwoVOs(labeledbyXandY)formedfromgettingspecificresourcesfromthreephysicalorganizations(A,B,andC).


===== page 445 =====
422 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
also join an existing VO. A participant may leave a VO, once its job is done. The dynamic nature of the
resources in a VO posts a great challenge for grid computing. Resources have to cooperate closely to pro-
duce a rewarding result. Without an effective resource management system, the grid or VO may be ineffi-
cient andwaste resources,ifpoorly managed.
7.1.3 Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA)
The OGSA is an open source grid service standard jointly developed by academia and the IT indus-
try under coordination of a working group in the Global Grid Forum (GGF). The standard was spe-
cifically developed for the emerging grid and cloud service communities. The OGSA is extended
from web service concepts and technologies. The standard defines a common framework that allows
businesses to build grid platforms across enterprises and business partners. The intent is to define
the standards required for both open source and commercial software to support a global grid
infrastructure.
7.1.3.1 OGSA Framework
The OGSA was built on two basic software technologies: the Globus Toolkit widely adopted as a
grid technology solution for scientific and technical computing, and web services (WS 2.0) as a
popular standards-based framework for business and network applications. The OGSA is intended
to support the creation, termination, management, and invocation of stateful, transient grid services
via standard interfaces and conventions [5]. The OGSA framework specifies the physical environ-
ment, security, infrastructure profile, resource provisioning, virtual domains, and execution environ-
ment for various grid services and API access tools.
Compared with the layered grid architecture in Figure 7.1, the OGSA is service-oriented.
A service is an entity that provides some capability to its client by exchanging messages. We
feel that greater flexibility is needed in grid service discovery and management. The service-
oriented architecture (SOA) presented in Chapter 5 serves as the foundation of grid computing
services. The individual and collective states of resources are specified in this service standard.
The standard also specifies interactions between these services within the particular SOA for
grids. An important point is that the architecture is not layered, where the implementation of one
service is built upon modules that are logically dependent. One may classify this framework as
object-oriented. Many web service standards, semantics, and extensions are applied or modified
in the OGSA.
7.1.3.2 OGSA Interfaces
TheOGSAiscenteredongridservices.Theseservicesdemandspecialwell-definedapplicationinter-
faces. These interfaces provide resource discovery, dynamic service creation, lifetime management,
notification,andmanageability.Theconventionsmustaddressnamingandupgradeability.Table7.3
summarizestheinterfacesproposedbytheOGSAworkinggroup.WhiletheOGSAdefinesavariety
of behaviors and associated interfaces, all but one of these interfaces (the grid service) is optional.
Twokeypropertiesofagridservicearetransienceandstatefulness.Thesepropertieshavesignificant
implicationsregardinghowagridserviceisnamed,discovered,andmanaged.Beingtransientmeans


===== page 446 =====
7.1 Grid Architecture and Service Modeling 423
Table 7.3 OGSA GridService InterfacesDeveloped bythe OGSAWorkingGroup
PortType Operation BriefDescription
Gridservice Findservicedata Queryagridserviceinstance,includingthehandle,reference,
primarykey,homehandlemap,interfaceinformation,and
service-specificinformation.Extensiblesupportforvarious
querylanguages.
Terminationtime Set(andget)terminationtimeforgridserviceinstance.
Destroy Terminategridserviceinstance.
Notificationsource Subscribeto Subscribetonotificationsofserviceevents.Allowdeliveryvia
notificationtopic third-partymessagingservices.
Notificationsink Delivernotification Carryoutasynchronousdeliveryofnotificationmessages.
Registry Registerservice Conductsoft-stateregistrationofGridServiceHandles(GSHs).
Unregisterservice UnregisteraGSH.
Factory Createservice Createanewgridserviceinstance.
Handlemap Findbyhandle ReturntheGridServiceReference(GSR)associatedwiththe
GSH.
the service can be created and destroyed dynamically; statefulness refers to the fact that one can
distinguishoneserviceinstancefromanother.
7.1.3.3 Grid Service Handle
A GSH is a globally unique name that distinguishes a specific grid service instance from all others.
The status of a grid service instance could be that it exists now or that it will exist in the future.
These instances carry no protocol or instance-specific addresses or supported protocol bindings.
Instead, these information items are encapsulated along with all other instance-specific information.
In order to interact with a specific service instance, a single abstraction is defined as a GSR.
Unlike a GSH, which is time-invariant, the GSR for an instance can change over the lifetime of
the service. The OGSA employs a “handle-resolution” mechanism for mapping from a GSH to a
GSR. The GSH must be globally defined for a particular instance. However, the GSH may not
always refer to the same network address. A service instance may be implemented in its own way,
as long as it obeys the associated semantics. For example, the port type on which the service
instance was implemented decides which operation to perform in Table 7.3.
7.1.3.4 Grid Service Migration
This is a mechanism for creating new services and specifying assertions regarding the lifetime of a
service. The OGSA model defines a standard interface, known as a factor, to implement this refer-
ence. Any service that is created must address the former services as the reference of later services.
The factory interface is labeled as a Create Service operation in Table 7.3. This creates a requested
grid service with a specified interface and returns the GSH and initial GSR for the new service
instance. It should also register the new service instance with a handle resolution service. Each
dynamically created grid service instance is associated with a specified lifetime.


===== page 447 =====
424 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Example 7.3 Grid Service Migration Using GSH and GSR
Figure 7.3 shows how a service instance may migrate from one location to another during execution.
A GSH resolves to a different GSR for a migrated service instance before (on the left) and after (on the
right) the migration at time T. The handle resolver simply returns different GSRs before and after the
migration. The initial lifetime can be extended by a specified time period by explicitly requesting the client
or another gridservice acting onthe client’sbehalf.
If the time period expires without having received a reaffirmed interest from a client, the service
instancecanbeterminatedonitsownandreleasetheassociatedresourcesaccordingly.Thelifetimeman-
agement enables robust termination and failure detection. This is done by clearly defining the lifetime
semantics of a service instance. Similarly, a hosting environment is guaranteed to consume bounded
resources under some system failures. If the termination time of a service is reached, the hosting environ-
mentcan reclaimall resourcesallocated.
7.1.3.5 OGSA Security Models
The OGSA supports security enforcement at various levels, as shown in Figure 7.4. The grid works
in a heterogeneous distributed environment, which is essentially open to the general public. We
must be able to detect intrusions or stop viruses from spreading by implementing secure conversa-
tions, single logon, access control, and auditing for nonrepudiation. At the security policy and user
levels, we want to apply a service or endpoint policy, resource mapping rules, authorized access of
critical resources, and privacy protection. At the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) service level, the
OGSA demands security binding with the security protocol stack and bridging of certificate autho-
rities (CAs), use of multiple trusted intermediaries, and so on. Trust models and secure logging are
often practiced in grid platforms.
Handle server Handle server
Resolve Resolve
(GSH) (GSH)
Client Client
Time=T
GSR 1 GSR 1 GSR 2
Service instance Service instance Migration Service instance
FIGURE 7.3
AGSHresolvingtoadifferentGSRforamigratedserviceinstancebefore(shownontheleft)andafter
(ontheright)themigrationattimeT.


===== page 448 =====
Secure
conversations
Service/end-point Mapping Authorization Privacy
policy rules policy policy
Policy expression and exchange
Bindings security
(transport, protocol, message security)
7.1.4 Data-Intensive Grid Service Models
Applications in the grid are normally grouped into two categories: computation-intensive and data-
intensive. For data-intensive applications, we may have to deal with massive amounts of data. For
example, the data produced annually by a Large Hadron Collider may exceed several petabytes
(1015 bytes). The grid system must be specially designed to discover, transfer, and manipulate these
massive data sets. Transferring massive data sets is a time-consuming task. Efficient data manage-
ment demands low-cost storage and high-speed data movement. Listed in the following paragraphs
are several common methods for solving data movement problems.
7.1.4.1 Data Replication and Unified Namespace
This data access method is also known as caching, which is often applied to enhance data efficiency
in a grid environment. By replicating the same data blocks and scattering them in multiple regions
of a grid, users can access the same data with locality of references. Furthermore, the replicas of
the same data set can be a backup for one another. Some key data will not be lost in case of fail-
ures. However, data replication may demand periodic consistency checks. The increase in storage
requirements and network bandwidth may cause additional problems.
Replication strategies determine when and where to create a replica of the data. The factors to
consider include data demand, network conditions, and transfer cost. The strategies of replication
can be classified into method types: dynamic and static. For the static method, the locations and
number of replicas are determined in advance and will not be modified. Although replication
Trust
model
Secure
logging
7.1 Grid Architecture and Service Modeling 425
Intrusion Credential and
Access control Audit &
detection identity translation
enforcement non-repudiation
(single logon)
Anti-virus
management
Policy
management
(authorization,
privacy,
federation,etc.)
User
management
Key
management
FIGURE7.4
TheOGSAsecuritymodelimplementedatvariousprotectionlevels.
(CourtesyofI.Foster,etal.,http://www.ogf.org/documents/GFD.80.pdf)


===== page 449 =====
426 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
operations require little overhead, static strategies cannot adapt to changes in demand, bandwidth,
and storage vailability. Dynamic strategies can adjust locations and number of data replicas accord-
ing to changes in conditions (e.g., user behavior).
However, frequent data-moving operations can result in much more overhead than in static stra-
tegies. The replication strategy must be optimized with respect to the status of data replicas. For sta-
tic replication, optimization is required to determine the location and number of data replicas. For
dynamic replication, optimization may be determined based on whether the data replica is being cre-
ated, deleted, or moved. The most common replication strategies include preserving locality, mini-
mizing update costs, and maximizing profits.
7.1.4.2 Grid Data Access Models
Multiple participants may want to share the same data collection. To retrieve any piece of data, we
need a grid with a unique global namespace. Similarly, we desire to have unique file names. To
achieve these, we have to resolve inconsistencies among multiple data objects bearing the same
name. Access restrictions may be imposed to avoid confusion. Also, data needs to be protected to
avoid leakage and damage. Users who want to access data have to be authenticated first and then
authorized for access. In general, there are four access models for organizing a data grid, as listed
here and shown in Figure 7.5.
Monadic model: This is a centralized data repository model, shown in Figure 7.5(a). All the
data is saved in a central data repository. When users want to access some data they have to
submit requests directly to the central repository. No data is replicated for preserving data
locality. This model is the simplest to implement for a small grid. For a large grid, this model is
not efficient in terms of performance and reliability. Data replication is permitted in this model
only when fault tolerance is demanded.
Hierarchical model: The hierarchical model, shown in Figure 7.5(b), is suitable for building a
large data grid which has only one large data access directory. The data may be transferred from
the source to a second-level center. Then some data in the regional center is transferred to the
third-level center. After being forwarded several times, specific data objects are accessed directly
by users. Generally speaking, a higher-level data center has a wider coverage area. It provides
higher bandwidth for access than a lower-level data center. PKI security services are easier to
implement in this hierarchical data access model. The European Data Grid (EDG) to be studied
in Section 7.2.3 adopts this data access model.
Federationmodel:ThisdataaccessmodelshowninFigure7.5(c)isbettersuitedfordesigninga
data grid with multiple sources of data supplies. Sometimes this model is also known as a mesh
model. The data sources are distributed to many different locations. Although the data is shared,
the data items are still owned and controlled by their original owners. According to predefined
accesspolicies,onlyauthenticatedusersareauthorizedtorequestdatafromanydatasource.This
meshmodelmaycostthemostwhenthenumberofgridinstitutionsbecomesverylarge.
Hybrid model: This data access model is shown in Figure 7.5(d). The model combines the best
features of the hierarchical and mesh models. Traditional data transfer technology, such as FTP,
applies for networks with lower bandwidth. Network links in a data grid often have fairly high
bandwidth, and other data transfer models are exploited by high-speed data transfer tools such
as GridFTP developed with the Globus library. The cost of the hybrid model can be traded off
between the two extreme models for hierarchical and mesh-connected grids.


===== page 450 =====
7.2 Grid Projects and Grid Systems Built 427
CERN
America Asia Europe
Instruments
Central data U.S.
Sensors respository Institution
Some university
Tape Desktop Desktop Desktop
(a) Monadic (b) Hierarchy
Institution
Root
Institution
Institution Region Region
Institution Institute Institute Institute
Institution
(c) Federation (d) Hybrid
FIGURE7.5
Fourarchitecturalmodelsforbuildingadatagrid.
7.1.4.3 Parallel versus Striped Data Transfers
Compared with traditional FTP data transfer, parallel data transfer opens multiple data streams for
passing subdivided segments of a file simultaneously. Although the speed of each stream is the
same as in sequential streaming, the total time to move data in all streams can be significantly
reduced compared to FTP transfer. In striped data transfer, a data object is partitioned into a num-
ber of sections, and each section is placed in an individual site in a data grid. When a user requests
this piece of data, a data stream is created for each site, and all the sections of data objects are
transferred simultaneously. Striped data transfer can utilize the bandwidths of multiple sites more
efficiently to speed up data transfer.
7.2 GRID PROJECTS AND GRID SYSTEMS BUILT
Grid computing provides promising solutions to contemporary users who want to effectively share
and collaborate with one another in distributed and self-governing environments. Apart from volun-
teer grids, most large-scale grids are national or international projects funded by public agencies.
This section reviews the major grid systems developed in recent years. In particular, we describe
three national grid projects that have been installed in the U.S., EU, and China.


===== page 451 =====
428 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.2.1 National Grids and International Projects
Like supercomputers, national grids are mainly funded through government sources. These national
grids are developed to promote research discovery, middleware products, and utility computing in
grid-enabled applications.
7.2.1.1 National Grid Projects
Overthepastdecade,manydata,information,orcomputationalgridswerebuiltinvariouspartsofthe
world.Table7.4summarizesfiverepresentativegridcomputingsystemsbuiltintheUnitedStates,Eur-
opean Union, United Kingdom, France, and China. We call these national grids, because they
areessentiallygovernment-fundedprojectspushingforgrandchallengeapplicationsthatdemandhigh-
performancecomputingandhigh-bandwidthcommunicationnetworks.HeretreattheEUcountriesasa
singleentity.Mostnationalgridsarebuiltbylinkingsupercomputercentersandmajorcomputerensem-
bles together with Internet backbones and high-bandwidth WANs or LANs. These grids are briefly
introducedinTable7.4.Moredetailscanbefoundinthecitedsubsequentsections.
7.2.1.2 International Grid Projects
Grid applications cannot be restricted to geographical boundaries. As summarized in Table 7.5,
several global-scale grid projects were launched or are still active in use today. These projects pro-
mote volunteer computing, utility computing, and specific software applications that utilizes grid
infrastructure. International grids involve both government and industrial funding. The European
Union has been a major player in grid computing. The most famous EU grid projects are the
EGEE, DataGrid, and BEinGrid. In the industrial sector, we have seen grid providers including Sun
Microsystems, IBM, HP, etc. International grids are built with fix-term projects. Some of them are
no longer active to provide public services at the end of funding.
Example 7.4 The EGEE Grid for Enabling Grids for E-sciencE
The EGEE grid infrastructure and projects were funded by the Europen Union in 3 stages from 2004 to
2006. EGEE stands for Enabling Grids for E-sciencE. The project is no longer active. However, the
Table 7.4 Some National GridProjectsin FiveCountries
Project Sponsor,Launch DistributedComputingCapabilityandApplications
TeraGrid(USA) NSF,2002(Sec.7.2.2) Anopengridinfrastructurein11resourcesites,with
40GbpsInternet2backbonelinkswith2Pflopscomputing
power,50PBstorage,and100specificdatabases.
DataGrid(EU) EUandCERN,2001 Claimedthelargestgridonearthfordataanalysisinhigh-
(7.2.3) energyphysics,environment,andbioinformatics,etc.
Grid’5000 FrenchGov.,2006, Anexperimentalgridcomprising5,000processorcoresin
(France) (Sec.7.2.1) 9FrenchcitiesforHPCandresearchuse(Section7.2.2).
ChinaGrid(China) EducationMinistry Aneducationalcomputinggridforresearchuse,linking
2005,(Sec.7.2.4) HPCsystemsin100Chineseuniversities.
NASGrid(USA) NASAAmesLab,2008 RunninggeneticalgorithmswiththeCondorcycle
scavengeronlargenumberofSunandSGIworkstations.


===== page 452 =====
7.2 Grid Projects and Grid Systems Built 429
Table 7.5 International GridProjects (Pastand Current)
Project DescriptionandOperatingRegion Status
EGEE EnablingGridsforE-sciencEinEuropeanUnioncountries 2004–2010
D4Science Grid-enabledtechnologyforscienceinEurope,Asia 2008–2009
andthePacific
NordicD-Grid NordicDatagridfacilityinScandinaviaandFinland 2006–2010
FutureGrid High-performanceandgridresearchgroupsinU.S.universities 2010–present
WorldGrid Worldcommunitygridhas6.2millionmachinesrunning 2004–present
theBOINCin2011
SETI@Home Volunteergridwith2.5machinesrunningradioscopesignalsin2001 2001–present
BOINC Berkeley-ledvolunteergridprojectsincludingthePrimeGrid, 2002–present
DNETC2Home,MilkyWay@Home,CollatzConjective,etc.
BEinGRID BusinessExperimentsinGridfundedbytheEuropeanCommission 2006–2009
distributed computing infrastructure built and nurtured by the projects DataGrid (2002-2004), EGEE-I, -II
and -III (2004-2010) is now supported by the European Grid Infrastructure. This long-term organization
coordinates National Grid Initiatives. Transitioning the care of the EGEE infrastructure to EGI is part of the
process forensuring a vibrant andsustained Europeanresearchcommunity.
The EGEE grid infrastructure consists of a set of middleware services deployed on a worldwide
collection of computational and storage resources plus the services provided. For production services, a
large multi-science grid infrastructure involves 250 resource centers world-wide, providing some 40,000
CPUs and several petabytes of storage. This infrastructure is used on a daily basis by several thousands of
scientistsover200virtualorganizationsonadailybasis.Thisisastable,well-supportedinfrastructure,run-
ning the latest released versions of the gLite middleware. The EDEE also has a pre-production service,
whichprovides accessto gridservices totest andevaluate features of the middleware.
In addition, the pre-production extends the middleware certification activity, helping to evaluate
deployment procedures, interoperability, and basic software functionality. Furthermore there is an EGEE
Network Operations Center (ENOC), which caters for the network operational coordination between EGEE
and othernetwork providers such asGEANT2 and NRENs. In the long run, the primary goals of EGEEand
EGI projects are to promote global collaboration for scientific research between academic and industrial
applications. Reported EGEE application challenges include health and medicine, genomics and
bioscience, particle physics and astronomy, environmental science, engineering design, chemistry and
material science, and social sciences. Interested readers are referred to the web site: http://www.eu-egee
.org fordetails.
Example 7.5 Grid’5000 Built over Nine French Cities
Grid’5000isanexperimentalgridtestbedplatformforprovidinglarge-scalecomputingandresearchinstru-
ments. As a national infrastructure, Grid’5000 connects 4,792 processor cores distributed over nine sites
in France. Figure 7.6 shows the processor core distribution. Grid’5000 is a confined system. PKI and


===== page 453 =====
430 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Lille
# of cores: 618
Orsay
# of cores: 684
Rennes
Nancy
# of cores: 722
# of cores: 574
Lyon
# of cores: 268
Bordeaux Grenoble
# of cores: 650 # of cores: 272
Toulouse Sophia
# of cores: 436 # of cores: 568
Grid’5000 sites
10 gnps link
FIGURE 7.6
OverviewofGrid’5000locatedatnineresourcesitesinFrance.
(Courtesyofhttps://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/Grid5000:Home)
X.509certificatesareusedtoenforcesecurityinGrid’5000.Thesystemusesdedicatedprivatenetworksto
construct a trustablebackbonenetwork.
The Grid’5000 sites are connected via high-bandwidth links. Each user has a universal account. Each
site manages its local user accounts, and each site runs a Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
server,whichmaintainsthesamedirectorytreeforallusers.Theuseraccountsatthelocalsitearetreated
with higher priority to read and write shared files. The user accounts at remote sites are only allowed to
read files locally. The account information of remote sites in the tree is synchronized periodically. From the
user’spoint of view, aglobally enabledaccountis installed in the entiregrid system.
7.2.2 NSF TeraGrid in the United States
TeraGrid is an open scientific discovery infrastructure combining leadership-class resources at 11
partner sites to create an integrated, persistent computational resource in the USA. Using high-
performance network connections, TeraGrid integrates high-performance computers, data resources
and tools, and high-end experimental facilities around the country. At the time of this writing, Tera-
Grid resources include more than 2 Pflops of computing capability and more than 50 petabytes of
online and archival data storage, with rapid access and retrieval over high-performance networks.
Researchers can also access more than 100 discipline-specific databases.
TeraGrid is coordinated through the Grid Infrastructure Group (GIG) at the University of Chicago,
working in partnership with the 11 resource provider sites: Indiana University, the Louisiana Optical
Network Initiative, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at UIUC, the


===== page 454 =====
7.2 Grid Projects and Grid Systems Built 431
National Institute for Computational Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center (PSC), Purdue University, the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC),
the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), the University of Chicago/ Argonne National
Laboratory (ANL), and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR).
When the project started in 2001, TeraGrid had only four resource sites at ANL, SDSC, UCSA,
and Caltech. In 2003, NSF added four sites to TeraGrid as well as established a third network hub,
in Atlanta. These new sites were at ORNL, Purdue University, Indiana University, and TACC.
TeraGrid construction was also made possible through key corporate partnerships with Sun Micro-
systems, IBM, Intel Corporation, Qwest Communications, Juniper, Myricom, Hewlett-Packard Com-
pany, and Oracle Corporation. At the time of this writing, the TeraGrid facility is entering full
production use. The next-generation petascale resources, called XD, may be added into one or two
national grid facilities in the United States from 2011 to 2016.
TeraGrid is a high-performance computing and communication (HPCC) system using the
Globus software/middleware tools to develop grids linking multiteraflop computers together. At the
timeofthiswriting,theInternetbackbonenetworksusedtobuildTeraGridincludeGbpslinks(four10
Gigabit Ethernetbundled together).Figure7.7showsfive TeraGridresourcesitesandtheirbackbone
networks. Majorresourcetypesateachgrid siteare identified.A40GB/secondextensiblebackplane
networkconnectstworegionalgatewayhubsinChicagoandLosAngeles.
TeraGrid resources are integrated through SOA. Each resource provides a service in terms of
specific interfaces and operational support. Computational resources run a set of software packages
called Coordinated TeraGrid Software and Services (CTSS). CTSS provides a familiar user environ-
ment on all TeraGrid systems, allowing scientists to port code from one system to another. CTSS
also provides integrative functions such as single sign-on, remote job submission, workflow support,
and data movement tools. CTSS includes the Globus Toolkit, Condor, distributed accounting man-
agement software, verification and validation software, and a set of compilers, programming tools,
and environment variables.
TeraGrid resources are interconnected by a dedicated optical network, with each resource provi-
der site connecting at either 10 Gigabits per second or 30 Gigabits per second. TeraGrid users
access the facility through national research networks such as the Internet2 Abilene backbone and
National LambdaRail. TeraGrid users primarily come from U.S. universities. Academic researchers
in the United States can obtain exploratory, or CPU hours. More extensive allocations involve pro-
posal submissions and awards after a peer-review process. All allocation proposals are handled
through the TeraGrid web site, https://www.teragrid.org/web.
7.2.3 DataGrid in the European Union
The European DataGrid Project (EDG) was funded by the European Union. This grid aims to build
the next-generation, high-throughput, production-quality grid infrastructure to support I/O-intensive
experiments in high-energy physics, earth observation, and bioinformatics. Specific grid middleware
was developed to coherently manage and share petabyte-range information volumes. The goal is to
secure access to massive amounts of data in a universal namespace. The system moves and repli-
cates data at high speeds from one geographical site to another and keeps consistency checking and
synchronization of multiple copies in a global scale.


===== page 455 =====
432 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
CALTECH: Data collection analysis ANL: Visualization
0.4 TF intel IA-64 cluster 1.25 TF intel-64 cluster
80 TB online disk 20 TB online disk
IA-32 datawulf cluster 06 Visualization nodes
Switch Switch
LA hub 40 GB/s extensible backplane network Chicago hub
Switch Switch
NCSA: Compute-intensive PSC: Heterogeneity
10 TF intel IA-64 cluster (128 6.3 TF compaq EV7 cluster
large-memory nodes) 221 TB online disk
SDSC: Data-intensive
4 TF intel IA-64 cluster
TF IBM power4 cluster
500 TB online disk
Sun disk server
FIGURE 7.7
FivemajorTeraGridresourcesites,connectedbya40GB/sbackplanenetworkbetweentheLAand
Chicagohubs.
(Courtesyofhttps://www.teragrid.org/web)
7.2.3.1 The EDG Architecture
Figure 7.8 shows the overall architecture of the EDG based on information released by CERN. The
DataGrid project has a multitier hierarchical organization. Data on the order of several petabytes
will be distributed in a hierarchical fashion to multiple sites worldwide. For example, Tier-0 is the
CERN computer center (European Organization for Nuclear Research) based in Geneva. This tier
stores almost all the relevant data. Several Tier-1 regional centers are located in Italy, France,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. The regional centers store smaller amounts of data. The
EDG uses an extensible schema-based resource model with a hierarchical namespace to handle the
creation of and access to all distributed and replicated data items.
Each Tier-1 center is further linked to a large number of Tier-2 data centers, which further link
to many Tier-3 institutes in a hierarchical manner. End users access the data grid at the worksta-
tions. The EDG does not guarantee QoS, and the resource information is based on an LDAP


===== page 456 =====
7.2 Grid Projects and Grid Systems Built 433
100Mb/s
CERN computer
Tier 0
center
2.4Gb/s
France region UK region Italy region
Tier 1 Fermilab ...
center center center
0.6∼2.4Gb/s
Tier 2 Tier 2 centeTrier 2 centeTrier 2 centeTrier 2 centeTrier 2 center
Tier 3 Institute Institute Institute Institute
Physical data cache
100M∼1000Mb/s
Workstations
FIGURE7.8
HierarchicaldatadistributionoftheEuropeanDataGrid(EDG).
(http://eu-datagrid.web.cern.ch/eu-datagrid©CERN)
network directory. Resource dissemination is batched and periodically pushed to other parts of the
grid. Resource discovery in the EDG is decentralized and query-based. The scheduler uses a hier-
archical organization with an extensible scheduling policy. A special workload distribution facility
balances the analysis of jobs submitted from hundreds of physicists to different entry points in the
grid. Application monitoring and collection of user access patterns can be used to optimize global
access and data distribution.
7.2.3.2 Data Distribution in the EDG
The core middleware used is the Globus Toolkit with hooks for data grids. The physical grid fabric
delivers all the necessary tools to manage a computing center, providing grid services on clusters of
thousands of server nodes. The EDG uses European and national research network infrastructures to
provide virtual private networks (VPNs) between the servers and the storage of resources. The
EDG wide-area test bed interfaces with existing mass storage management systems based on the
core Globus middleware. Grid monitoring enables end users and administrators to check status and
error information in the EDG environment.


===== page 457 =====
434 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
The data accessor and data locator are used to map location-independent identifiers to location-
dependentidentifiers.Thedataaccessorisaninterfaceencapsulatingthedetailsofthelocalfilesystem
andmassstoragesystemssuchasCastorandHPSS.Severalimplementationsofthisgenericinterface
exist. The data locator makes use of the generic metadata manager, which is responsible for efficient
publishingandmanagementofadistributedandhierarchicalsetofobjects.Queryoptimizationensures
thatforagivenqueryanoptimalmigrationandreplicationplanisproduced.Suchplansprovideappro-
priatesecuritymechanismstocoverconnectedresources,independentoforganizationalboundaries.
7.2.4 The ChinaGrid Design Experiences
ChinaGrid aims to build the largest education and research platform of over 100 universities across
China. The system is used for research, science, and education projects by aggregating existing
dispersed resources throughout the China Education and Research Network (CERNET). In 2002,
ChinaGridwaslaunchedbytheMinistryofEducationofChinaamong100keyuniversitiesinChina.
Thegoalistoprovideanationwidegridcomputingplatform.Thisgridserviceattemptstopromotecol-
laborativeresearch,andscientificandeducationprojects.ChinaGridintegratesheterogeneousmassive
resourcesdistributedbasedongridtechnology.
7.2.4.1 Connectivity of ChinaGrid
As a long-term project, the first phase of ChinaGrid, from 2003 to 2006, focused on various plat-
forms and applications (ranging from life science to computational physics) on a computation grid
(e-Science) and covered many top universities in China, among them Tsinghua University, Huaz-
hong University of Science and Technology, Peking University, Beihang University, South China
University of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Southeast University, Xi’an Jiaotong
University, National University of Defense Technology, etc. Details on the connectivity can be
found in (http://grid.hust.edu.cn/platform/project/chinagrid/index.html).
ChinaGrid is built and deployed based on CERNET, which is the second largest nationwide net-
work inChinaandcovers800additionuniversities,colleges,andinstitutesinChina.Ahigh-bandwidth
(2.5 Gbps for the backbone) and rich scientific and education resource provides the fabric environ-
ment forconstructingChinaGrid. At the core of ChinaGrid is its grid middleware, called ChinaGrid
Supporting Platform (CGSP). CGSP integrates all kinds of resources in education and research
environments, makes the heterogeneous and dynamic nature of these resources transparent to users,
andprovidesahigh-performance,highlyreliable,secure,convenient,andtransparentgridservicefor
scientificcomputingandengineeringresearch.
7.2.4.2 Applications of ChinaGrid
CGSP provides the ChinaGrid service portal, a set of core grid services including execution man-
agement, data services, information services, and monitoring services, and various utilities for
deploying various grid applications. Based on CGSP, five application-specific grids are deployed: a
bioinformatics grid, computational fluid dynamics grid, massive information processing grid, dis-
tance education grid for offering higher education courses online, and image processing grid. At the
time of this writing, ChinaGrid’s total computing power had reached 170 teraflops and its total sto-
rage capacity had reached 170 terabytes. ChinaGrid projects support a variety of applications,
including weather forecasting, petroleum reservoir simulation, high-energy physics, numerical wind
tunnel simulation, ship structure analysis, and traffic control and guidance.


===== page 458 =====
7.3 Grid Resource Management and Brokering 435
7.3 GRID RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND BROKERING
In this section, we will discuss the grid resource management middleware, including scheduling,
monitoring, and accounting. We will present two grid resource management technologies, the Glo-
bus Toolkit and the ChinaGrid Support Platform. Grid resource brokering and scheduling are two
kernel functions of grid resource management. We will also cover grid operational flow and intro-
duce the Gridbus resource broker as a brokering example.
7.3.1 Resource Management and Job Scheduling
In a grid system, resources are usually autonomous. Each organization may have its own
resource management policies. It is more reasonable and adaptable to set an individual resource
management system (RMS) for an organization—the RMSes in the upper level can be consid-
ered the resource consumers, and the RMSes in the lower level can be considered the resource
providers. To support such a multi-RMS structure, an abstract model for RMS is introduced.
Figure 7.9 shows the structure of this model. There are four published interfaces in the model.
The resource consumer interface is for access from upper-level RMS or user applications.
The resource discoverer actively searches qualified resources by this interface. The resource
disseminator broadcasts information about local resources to other RMSes. The resource trader
exchanges resources among RMSes for market-based grid systems. The resource resolver routes
jobs to remote RMSes. The resource co-allocator simultaneously allocates multiple resources
to a job.
Resource consumer interface
QoS broker
Resource
Naming proxy
discoverer
Resource Resource
manager Resource Scheduler & state manager
Security proxy
Peer resolver estimator support
interface Resource co- interface
Other proxy
allocator
Job manager
Resource provider interface
FIGURE 7.9
Majorcomponentsofagridresourcemanagementsystem(RMS)supportedbyGlobus.
(CourtesyofI.Foster[17])


===== page 459 =====
436 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.3.1.1 Hierarchy of RMSes
These RMSes are interconnected with one another. The RMSes are set in a hierarchical structure.
The resource provider interface is for the lower-level RMS or actual resources. Resources and jobs
in the lower-level RMS are managed and controlled through this interface. If it is supported, a
resource reservation agent is also implemented here. A resource manager peer interface is used to
interoperate with other RMSes in the same level. Job requests are accepted from this interface, and
are forwarded to the local scheduler.
7.3.1.2 Grid Job Scheduling Methods
The grid is a new kind of distributed computing technology. Scheduling technology in the grid is
not a completely new research topic. Traditional distributed systems (e.g., clusters) have similar
issues in grid scheduling. These issues may have been explored for decades. Much research has
been conducted on scheduling technology in traditional distributed systems. Two schemas are often
usedtoclassifythem:hierarchicalclassification,whichclassifiesschedulingmethodsbyamultilevel
tree(Figure7.11)andflatclassificationbasedonasingle attribute.Theseincludemethodsbasedon
adaptiveversusnonadaptive,loadbalancing,bidding,orprobabilisticandone-timeassignmentversus
dynamicreassignment.
The resources in a grid are often heterogeneous. The hardware capacity (e.g., the number of
processors and the amount of memory) and the software configuration may be different for each
site. It is reasonable for traditional scheduling to determine resource allocation without considering
the differences among the sites. But this is unacceptable for a grid. The scheduler has to estimate
the performance of a job for each candidate resource. We need a grid performance model to assess
the cost in terms of time and efficiency in relation to grid applications.
A dynamic performance model is more accurate in estimating real grid applications. Some skills
may be exploited to improve the precision of simulation modeling. The inner structure of the appli-
cation or source code of the program needs to be analyzed. This modeling approach may cut the
makespan of an individual job into several sections, including the queuing time, data transfer time,
Queuing theory
Optimal Enumerative
Math pgmg.
Approximate
Sub-optimal Graph theory
Local
Heuristic
Static
Optimal
Global Cooperative Approximate
Physically Sub-optimal
distributed Heuristic
Non-cooperative
Dynamic
Physically non-distributed
FIGURE 7.10
Hierarchicalclassificationofgridjobschedulingmethodsforgridsandcomputerclusters.


===== page 460 =====
7.3 Grid Resource Management and Brokering 437
and computation time. Some sample data sets and benchmark programs are needed to collect the
information for training the performance model.
The resources in a grid are dynamically allocated for different applications. For traditional dis-
tributed systems, the system administrator has full control of the resources. (P2P is not considered
here, because job scheduling is not a key issue of it.) There are only two players (the system and
the user). The scheduling technologies can completely focus on performance. The optimization
objective of the scheduling can be system-centric or application-centric. However, the owner of the
resources has the right to determine the number and quality of resources to be shared in the grid.
The grid has three players: the grid system, resource provider, and resource customer.
Without any incentives, the resource providers will be reluctant to share more and better
resources. So the optimization objectives of scheduling in the grid have to take the benefit of
resource providers into account. The most common incentive is to allocate resources for jobs based
on economics principles. In an economic-based grid computing environment, users express their
requirements for QoS, and their preferred cost for different levels QoS. The grid service providers
need to work out a cost model for various services.
7.3.2 Grid Resource Monitoring with CGSP
Generally, when we talk about monitoring in a grid environment to solve a particular problem,
many elements are involved, including target grid resources as well as relevant grid middleware and
application components on top of them.
7.3.2.1 Producer/Consumer Model for Grid Monitoring
Theproducer/consumermodelisshowninFigure7.11.Thismodelprovidesabasicframeworkforgrid
resourcemonitoringtosupportfunctionalitiesrequiredbyusers,andtoimproveinteroperabilityamong
different grid resources.Gridmonitoringdataincludesshortlifetimes,frequentchanges,randomness,
andsoon.Themodelshouldsatisfytherequirementsoflowlatency,hightransferrates,lowoverhead,
Directory Consumer
service
Event data
Search/ Producer interface
register
Consumer Producer Monitoring service X
Events
Consumer interface
Event data
Sensor Application Monitor Database
Producer
(a) GMA components (b) Intermediary
FIGURE7.11
Producer/consumergridmonitoringmodelimplementedinthegridmonitoringarchitecture(GMA).


===== page 461 =====
438 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
security,andscalability.Inparticular,thediscoveryandtransmissionofgridmonitoringdatashouldbe
handledseparately.Relatedmetadatadescribingtheprofilesofmonitoringdataneedstobestoredina
publiclocation.
Example 7.6 ChinaGrid SuperVision (CGSV) for Resource Monitoring
In ChinaGrid, the monitoring system is essential to keep such a complex distributed system efficient. The
CGSP components, including the Job Manager, Storage Manager, and Information Center, provide system
status information for different purposes. The ChinaGrid SuperVision (CGSV) system (Figure 7.12) was
specifically designed for monitoring ChinaGrid performance. In addition to common inventory tracking
tasks, ChinaGrid also requires CGSV to have scalable support to different types of data requests, and an
efficient approachto dataprocessingand transmission.
To cope with these requirements, CGSV is designed to be an adaptable, stream-integrated grid moni-
toring system. A transfer and control protocol was designedto efficiently transfer various types of measure-
ment data and perform modifications over producer behavior in a unified way. Re-publishers are stream-
oriented, in that they are designed to support predicate-based processing over measurement data streams
and SQL-like stream queryinterfaces.
The CGSV is designed based on the GMA proposed by the Open Grid Forum (OGF). The CGSV is built
with a collection layer, service layer, and presentation layer, as shown in Figure 7.12. In the collection
layer, sensors are deployed to measure data collection. Sensor-I is responsible for collecting hardware
resource information. Other sources of information including network condition and dynamic service infor-
mation or datageneratedby othermonitoringtools are wrappedbyanadapterto unify the dataformat.
Above the data interface, we have the service layer. In each domain of ChinaGrid, this layer is
presented as a logical domain monitoring center, where Domain Registry Service and Monitor Services are
deployed. A Message Gateway Service is provided to alleviate the communication cost of monitoring
services since too many notifications and subscriptions will decrease service performance tremendously.
The top layeris the presentationlayer, wheredataanalysis andvisualization areperformed.
Virtualization/management
Registry Message gateway service
+
Monitor service
schema
Archive repository
repository
Transfer & contorl protocol
Sensor-II
Local storage
(republisher)
Adaptor
Sensor-I
Other data source producer
FIGURE 7.12
ArchitectureofCGSVmoduledeployment.
(CourtesyofY.Wu,etal.[56])


===== page 462 =====
7.3 Grid Resource Management and Brokering 439
7.3.3 Service Accounting and Economy Model
Economics-based resource trading is an effective way to allocate grid resources. First, resource
providers register their shared resources together with resource information in a grid market. The
resource information may include hardware capacity, software configuration, and price policy. Then
resource customers submit their jobs with special requirements to a resource broker. These require-
ments may include hardware capacity, software configuration, QoS, and budget. Next, the broker
searches and allocates qualified resources in the grid market for each job. When the jobs are
successfully completed, the customers are charged for the resources allocated. Figure 7.13 shows
the framework of an accounting system for distributed grid services. Two accounting services are
introduced in the following paragraphs.
7.3.3.1 Monitoring and Metering Services
This component directly collects raw usage information (e.g., CPU time) from grid services or
resources. Generally speaking, each grid service container or computing node should have a moni-
toring component deployed. The collected raw data is forwarded to the upper-level component, the
metering component. The raw data can be gathered by querying the grid service, analyzing the log
data of the application, or obtaining it directly from the underlying system. The metering service
obtains the raw usage information from the monitoring component, and applies charge policies
based on service usage. The charge policies are the mappings between raw usage events and mone-
tary charge events. The charge policies specify the formulas used to obtain the cost from the appli-
cation, user, and result.
To maintain good grid economy, the accounting system demands a grid economy model. The
usage data collected by the accounting system will be considered as the foundation of charges to
customers. If the usage data is faked or modified by malicious services, incorrect actions will
be operated on customers’ and providers’ accounts. As a result, the order of the grid economy will
be seriously disturbed. Some accounting systems have taken measures to ensure security. GridBank
Accounting
service
Metering service
Monitoring Monitoring
Grid service Grid service Grid service Grid service
FIGURE7.13
Agenericframeworkofagridaccountingsystemforbillingservices.


===== page 463 =====
440 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
[8], the accounting system of Gridbus, uses SOAP over Globus Toolkit sockets. Access from the
remote service is authenticated and authorized with this grid security infrastructure. Grids normally
consist of multiple real organizations. The accounting has to be performed across multiple domains,
so the accounting system must provide the access interface of standard grid services. Globus Toolkit
is the most popular and de facto standard for grid services.
7.3.3.2 Accounting Component
The primary function of an accounting module is to maintain the economic relationship between
resource customers and providers. By receiving and converting charge events from the metering
module, the accounting module records billing events. An accounting event is the action which will
be operated on the account of each grid user. The account of the grid user holds the information on
the balance amount. Some other features are also demanded for accounting in a grid, such as the
security of the accounting system.
Over the past several years, realizing the full promise of the grid has required solutions to funda-
mental issues of authentication, authorization, resource discovery, resource access, and most nota-
bly, incompatibility of resources and policies for managing them. A wide variety of projects and
products offer services intended to address these issues. Several grid middleware libraries have been
developed and deployed, including the popular Globus Toolkit, glite, and CGSP. In this section, we
will focus on Globus Toolkit and CGSP, two of the most important grid middleware libraries that
underlie various systems and that provide the basis for most grid technology deployments.
Example 7.7 An Economy Model for Grid Computing
Figure 7.14 shows a generic economy model for assessing grid computing services in terms of cost-
effectiveness. Besides the users (consumer) and providers, the computational economy needs some other
components. The Trade Manager identifies resource access costs; the Grid Market Directory allows
resource owners to publish their services; the Grid Trade Server negotiates with resource users and
maximizes benefits; Pricing Policies define the price of the resource; and the Grid Bank records resource
usage and bills the user. Co-allocation of resourcesis a special demand of grid scheduling. Some kinds of
applications (e.g., workflow, multisite applications) in grids usually demand multiple resources from
multiple sites simultaneously.
For example, interactive data analysis mayrequiresimultaneous accessto several resources, such asa
storage system holding a copy of the data, a supercomputer for analysis, network elements for data
transfer,andadisplaydeviceforinteraction.Two-phasetransactionisoftenusedtosolvetheproblemof
co-allocation.Torequestmultipleresources,thefirststepistoacquirequalifiedresources.Thesecondstep
istobindtheresourceforspecificapplications.Ifthecommissionofanyresourcefails,thecommissionsof
allresourceswillbecancelled,andthesystemwillstarttofindanewsolutionfortherequest.
7.3.4 Resource Brokering with Gridbus
Figure 7.15 shows the grid environment from an operations perspective with the components orga-
nized according to their deployment and functionality. To make resources constituents of the grid,
they need to be accessible from different management domains. This can be achieved by installing


===== page 464 =====
Grid Grid bank
explorer Info Information
Grid market service
services
Schedule
advisor Secure
Grid node
Pricing
Trade Trade server
Trading algorithms
manager
Accounting
Resource
Deployment agent Job
reservation
execution
Resource
Storage allocation
Grid consumer Grid resource broker Grid middleware Grid service provider
services
noitacilppA
gnimmargorP stnemnorivne
tnega
lortnoc
boJ
7.3 Grid Resource Management and Brokering 441
FIGURE7.14
Aneconomymodelforassessinggridcomputingservices,developedattheUniversityofMelbourne.
(CourtesyofBuyya,etal.[8])
Application code
Explore
1 data
Data source Data Visual applicatio 2 n composer R c e a s s u t l t i s n f + o 10
(Instruments/dis- Grid
tributed sources) Data catalogue 5 resource broker 3 Grid info service
Data replicator 6 4 12
(GDMP)
ASP catalogue b 9 7 Grid market directory
J o ult
8 R
es
$
Grid service (GS)
Alchami Bill
(Globus)
GS
11
CPU GTS Gridbus
or PE GridBank
Cluster scheduler PE Cluster scheduler
PE PE
Grid service GSP GSP GSP GSP
provider (GSP) (e.g., IBM) (e.g., UofM) (e.g., VPAC) (Accounting service)
(e.g., CERN)
FIGURE7.15
Agridresourcebrokermanagingjobschedulingandexecution.
(CourtesyofBuyyaandBubendorfer(editors)[9])


===== page 465 =====
442 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
core grid middleware such as Globus in UNIX/Linux environments. Multinode clusters need to be
presented as a single resource to the grid, and this can be achieved by deploying job management
systems such as the Sun Grid Engine on them.
In a grid environment where data needs to be federated for sharing among various interested
parties, data grid technologies such as SRB, Globus RLS, and EU DataGrid need to be deployed.
The user-level middleware needs to be deployed on resources responsible for providing resource
brokering and application execution management services. Users may even access these services via
web portals. Several grid resource brokers have been developed. Some of the more prominent
include Nimrod-G, Condor-G, GridWay, and Gridbus Resource Broker. The following 11 steps are
followed to aggregate the Grid resources:
1. The user composes his application as a distributed application (e.g., parameter sweep) using
visual application development tools.
2. The user specifies his analysis and QoS requirements and submits them to the grid resource
broker.
3. The grid resource broker performs resource discovery using the grid information service.
4. The broker identifies resource service prices by querying the grid market directory.
5. The broker identifies the list of data sources or replicas and selects the optimal ones.
6. The broker identifies computational resources that provide the required services.
7. The broker ensures that the user has necessary credit or an authorized share to utilize the
resources.
8. The broker scheduler analyzes the resources to meet the user’s QoS requirements.
9. The broker agent on a resource executes the job and returns the results.
10. The broker collates the results and passes them to the user.
11. The meter charges the user by passing the resource usage information to the accountant.
Example 7.8 The Gridbus Architecture at the University of Melbourne
The accountant reports resource share allocation or credit utilization to the use. The Gridbus Resource
Broker [9,48] is a market-oriented meta-scheduler for computational and data grids, with support for a
wide range of grid middleware and services. It takes care of many functions that grid applications require,
including discovering the right resources for a particular user application, scheduling jobs to meet dead-
lines, andhandlingfaults thatmayoccur duringexecution.
In particular, the broker provides capabilities such as resource selection, job scheduling, job manage-
ment, and data access to any application that requires distributed grid resources for execution. The broker
handles communication with the resources running different grid middleware, job failures, varying
resource availability, and different user objectives such as meeting a deadline for execution or limiting
execution within a certain budget. The design of the Gridbus broker follows a layered architecture consist-
ing of interface, core, and execution layers that together provide the capabilities shown in Figure 7.16 for
the market-oriented broker.
TheinterfacelayerconsistsofAPIsandparsersfortheinputfilesthroughwhichexternalprogramsand
userscommunicatewiththebroker.Resourcediscoveryandnegotiation,scheduling,andjobmonitoringare
carriedoutinthecorelayer.Jobexecutioniscarriedoutthroughtheexecutionlayersinwhichmiddleware-
specific adapters communicate with the target resources. In the Gridbus broker, middleware-specific


===== page 466 =====
Application development interface
adaptersareimplementedasplug-inactuatorsthatsupportdeploymentofjobsonresourcesaccessiblevia
gridmiddlewaresuchasGlobusandenterprisecloudapplicationplatformssuchasAneka.
The broker also works with public clouds such as Amazon EC2 and supports remote job execution via
SSH on clusters managed by queuing systems such as PBS, Condor, and SGE. The broker enables
differenttypesofschedulingdependingontheobjectivesoftheuserandtypeofresources.Atpresent,the
brokercanaccommodatecompute,storage,network,andinformationresourceswithpricesbasedontime
(e.g.,1GridDollar/s)orcapacity(e.g.,1GridDollarfor1MB).Itcanalsoaccommodateuserobjectives
suchasthefastestcomputationwithinthebudget(timeoptimization),orthecheapestcomputationwithin
thedeadline(costoptimization)forbothcomputeanddata-intensiveapplications.Thecompute-intensive
algorithmsarebasedonthosedevelopedpreviouslyinNimrod/G[10].
7.4 SOFTWARE AND MIDDLEWARE FOR GRID COMPUTING
In this section, we will study the middleware libraries developed for grid computing over the years.
First, we give an overview of open source middleware packages. Then we introduce the Globus
Toolkit based on version GT4. The concept of Globus containers and the grid resource allocation
interfaces Scheduling
7.4 Software and Middleware for Grid Computing 443
Home node/portal Single-sign on
Algorithm1 security
Gridbus batch() - PBS
- Condor
broker - SGE
AlgorithmN fork() - Aneka
- XGrid
Data catalog
Plugin activators
Aneka Globus
Data store Amazon EC2 SSH
Job manager
Access technology fork()
AMI
fork() - - P C B on S dor batch() G a r g id e b n u t s Grid FTP SRB - - - P C S B G on S E dor batch() G a r g id e b n u t s
- SGE - XGrid
FIGURE7.16
ArchitectureoftheGridbusresourcebrokeranditsinteractionwithmanypublicorprivategrids/clouds.
(CourtesyofBuyyaandBubendorfer(editors)[9])
[image text] Algorithml
agent


===== page 467 =====
444 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
manager are studied in more detail. Finally, we study the CGSP library specifically developed out
of the ChinaGrid Project.
7.4.1 Open Source Grid Middleware Packages
As reviewed in Berman, Fox, and Hey [5], many software, middleware, and programming environ-
ments have been developed for grid computing over past 15 years. Below we assess their relative
strength and limitations based on recently reported applications. We first introduce some grid stan-
dards and popular APIs. Then we present the desired software support and middleware developed
for grid computing. Table 7.6 summarizes four grid middleware packages.
7.4.1.1 Grid Standards and APIs
Grid standards have been developed over the years. The Open Grid Forum (formally Global Grid
Forum)andObjectManagementGrouparetwowell-formedorganizationsbehindthosestandards.We
havealreadyintroducedtheOGSA(OpenGridServicesArchitecture)inChapter5andSection7.1.3.
InChapter5,wehavealsoreportedsomegridstandardsincludingtheGLUEforresourcerepresenta-
tion,SAGA(SimpleAPIforGridApplications),GSI(GridSecurityInfrastructure),OGSI(OpenGrid
ServiceInfrastructure),andWSRE(WebServiceResourceFramework).
GSI willbe studied in Section 7.5.5. The grid standards have guided the development of several
middleware libraries and API tools for grid computing. They are applied in both research grids and
production grids today. Research grids tested include the EGEE, France Grilles, D-Grid (German),
CNGrid (China), TeraGrid (USA), etc. Production grids built with the standards include the EGEE,
INFN grid (Italian), NorduGrid, Sun Grid, Techila, and Xgrid [52]. We review next the software
environmentsandmiddlewareimplementationsbasedonthesestandards.
7.4.1.2 Software Support and Middleware
Grid middleware is specifically designed a layer between hardware and the software. The middle-
ware products enable the sharing of heterogeneous resources and managing virtual organizations
created around the grid. Middleware glues the allocated resources with specific user applications.
Table 7.6 Grid Software SupportandMiddleware Packages
Package BriefDescription,ReferencesandCoverageinThisBook
BOINC BerkeleyOpenInfrastructureforNetworkComputing.
UNICORE MiddlewaredevelopedbytheGermangridcomputingcommunity.
Globus(GT4) AmiddlewarelibraryjointlydevelopedbyArgonneNationalLab.,Univ.of
Chicago,andUSCInformationScienceInstitute,fundedbyDARPA,NSF,and
NIH.(Sections7.4.2,7.4.3,and7.5.5).
CGSPinChinaGrid TheCGSP(ChinaGridSupportPlatform)isamiddlewarelibrarydevelopedby20
topuniversitiesinChinaaspartoftheChinaGridProject(Section7.4.4).
Condor-G OriginallydevelopedattheUniv.ofWisconsinforgeneraldistributedcomputing,
andlaterextendedtoCondor-Gforgridjobmanagement.(Example7.9).
SunGridEngine(SGE) DevelopedbySunMicrosystemsforbusinessgridapplications.Appliedto
privategridsandlocalclusterswithinenterprisesorcampuses.(Example7.10).


===== page 468 =====
7.4 Software and Middleware for Grid Computing 445
Popular grid middleware tools include the Globus Toolkits (USA), gLight, UNICORE (German),
BOINC (Berkeley), CGSP (China), Condor-G, and Sun Grid Engine, etc. [52]. Table 7.6 sum-
marizes the grid software support and middleware packages developed for grid systems since 1995.
In subsequent sections, we will describe the features in Condor-G, SGE, GT4, and CGSP.
Example 7.9 introduces the matchmaking capability of Condor and Condor-G developed at
University of Wisconsin. Example 7.10 discusses the features of Sun’s Grid Engine developed at
Sun Microsystems for business grid computing.
Example 7.9 Features in Condor Kernel and Condor-G for Grid Computing
Condorisasoftwaretoolforhigh-throughputdistributedbatchcomputing.Itwasdesignedtoexploretheidle
cycles of a network of distributed computers. The major components of Condor are the user agent,
resources,andmatchmaker,asshowninFigure7.17.TheClassAds(classifiedadvertisements)language
wasexploitedinCondortoexpressuserrequestsagainstavailableresourcesinadistributedsystem.Agents
andresourcesadvertisetheirstatusandrequirementsinClassAdstoacentralmatchmaker.Thematch-
makerscanstheClassAdsandcreatespairsof(resources,agents)thatmatcheachother’srequirements.
Subsequently,thematchedagentnegotiateswiththeavailableresourcetoexecutethe job.Twoproblem
solversareprovided inCondor:themaster-worker andthe DAGmanager. Forspecific jobs, Condor records
checkpoints and subsequently resumes program execution from the checkpoints. When running a job
on remote machines without a shared file system, Condor accesses the local execution environment via
remote system calls. Condor-G was designedto match the GRAM protocol (to be covered in Section 7.4.4)
for coupling jobswithresourcesintheGlobusProject.Condor-Gaddsdurabilityandtwo-phasecommitment
to prevent the loss and repetition of jobs in GRAM. However, Condor-G does not support all the features
inGRAM.
Matchmaker
(central manager)
Problem solver
Agent Resource
User (DAGMan)
(schedd) (startd)
(Master-worker)
Shadow Sandbox
(shadow) (starter)
Job
FIGURE7.17
MajorfunctionalcomponentsinaCondorsystem(Condor-specificnamesareinparentheses).


===== page 469 =====
446 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Example 7.10 The Sun Grid Engine (SGE) Middleware Package
SGE was developed by Sun Microsystems in response to increasing demands of business grid
applications. SGE features are applied to private grids and local clusters within an enterprise or campus
for intranet-based cluster or grid applications. The system supports batch processing with dynamic
allocation of grid resources. Fault tolerance and failover capability are implemented. Users can specify
resources independent of submission locations. Job status and resource utilization can be monitored
periodically.
Sun offers free and enterprise editions of the SGE package. The system offerscentralized management
of all resources allocated to individual jobs. This was meant to enhance efficiency and performance. Sus-
pend and resume tools are provided to allow users to halt a job and restart it later without losing the work
already completed. The SGEworkflow followsthe following sequenceof events:
(cid:129) Accepts the jobs from users
(cid:129) Places jobsin a computerareauntil execution
(cid:129) Sendsthe jobs from the holding areatoa hostwhere theycanbeexecuted
(cid:129) Manages the jobs duringexecution
(cid:129) Logsa record oftheir executionwhen theyare finished
The SGE system uses reserved ports, Kerberos, DCE, SSL, and authentication in classified hosts to
enforcesecurity at different trust levelsandresource accessrestrictions.
7.4.2 The Globus Toolkit Architecture (GT4)
The Globus Toolkit, started in 1995 with funding from DARPA, is an open middleware library for
the grid computing communities. These open source software libraries support many operational
grids and their applications on an international basis. The toolkit addresses common problems and
issues related to grid resource discovery, management, communication, security, fault detection, and
portability. The software itself provides a variety of components and capabilities. The library
includes a rich set of service implementations.
The implemented software supports grid infrastructure management, provides tools for building
new web services in Java, C, and Python, builds a powerful standard-based security infrastructure
and client APIs (in different languages), and offers comprehensive command-line programs for
accessing various grid services. The Globus Toolkit was initially motivated by a desire to remove
obstacles that prevent seamless collaboration, and thus sharing of resources and services, in
scientificandengineeringapplications.Thesharedresourcescanbecomputers,storage,data,services,
networks, science instruments (e.g., sensors), and so on. The Globus library version GT4, is concep-
tuallyshowninFigure7.18.
7.4.2.1 The GT4 Library
GT4 offers the middle-level core services in grid applications. The high-level services and tools,
such as MPI, Condor-G, and Nirod/G, are developed by third parties for general-purpose distributed
computing applications. The local services, such as LSF, TCP, Linux, and Condor, are at the bot-
tom level and are fundamental tools supplied by other developers. Table 7.7 summarizes GT4’s
core grid services by module name. Essentially, these functional modules help users to discover


===== page 470 =====
7.4 Software and Middleware for Grid Computing 447
Applications
DRM High-level services and tools Grid status
Cactus MPI Globusrun PUNCH Nimrod/G Condor-G
Core services
GASS Metacomputing GRAM
directory Globus security Replica catalog
GridFTP service (MDS) interface (GSI) I/O
Condor MPI Local TCP UDP
services
LSF PBS NQE Linux AIX Solaris
FIGURE7.18
GlobusTookitGT4supportsdistributedandclustercomputingservices.
(CourtesyofI.Foster[17])
Table 7.7 Functional Modulesin Globus GT4Library
ServiceFunctionality ModuleName FunctionalDescription
GlobalResourceAllocation GRAM GridResourceAccessandManagement(HTTP-based)
Manager
Communication Nexus Unicastandmulticastcommunication
GridSecurityInfrastructure GSI Authenticationandrelatedsecurityservices
MonitoryandDiscovery MDS Distributedaccesstostructureandstateinformation
Service
HealthandStatus HBM Heartbeatmonitoringofsystemcomponents
GlobalAccessof GASS Gridaccessofdatainremotesecondarystorage
SecondaryStorage
GridFileTransfer GridFTP Inter-nodefastfiletransfer
CourtesyofIanFoster[17].
available resources, move data between sites, manage user credentials, and so on. As a de facto
standard in grid middleware, GT4 is based on industry-standard web service technologies.
In Section 7.4.3, we will examine the HTTP-based GRAM and MDS modules. Nexus is used
for collective communications and HBM for heartbeat monitoring of resource nodes. GridFTP is for


===== page 471 =====
448 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
speedingupinternodefiletransfers.ThemoduleGASSisusedforglobalaccessofsecondarystorage.
GSI(gridsecurityinfrastructure)willbecoveredinSection7.5.Moredetailsofthefunctionalmodules
ofGlobusGT4andtheirapplicationsareavailableatwww.globus.org/toolkit/.
7.4.2.2 Globus Job Workflow
Figure 7.19 shows the typical job workflow when using the Globus tools. A typical job execution
sequenceproceedsasfollows:Theuserdelegateshiscredentialstoadelegationservice.Theusersub-
mits a job request to GRAM with the delegation identifieras a parameter. GRAM parsesthe request,
retrieves the user proxy certificate from the delegation service, and then acts on behalf of the user.
GRAMsendsatransferrequesttotheRFT(ReliableFileTransfer),whichappliesGridFTPtobringin
the necessary files. GRAM invokes a local scheduler via a GRAM adapter and the SEG (Scheduler
EventGenerator)initiatesasetofuserjobs.ThelocalschedulerreportsthejobstatetotheSEG.Once
thejobiscomplete,GRAMusesRFTandGridFTPtostageouttheresultantfiles.Thegridmonitorsthe
progressoftheseoperationsandsendstheuseranotificationwhentheysucceed,fail,oraredelayed.
7.4.2.3 Client-Globus Interactions
GT4 service programs are designed to support user applications as illustrated in Figure 7.20.
There are strong interactions between provider programs and user code. GT4 makes heavy use of
industry-standard web service protocols and mechanisms in service description, discovery, access,
authentication, authorization, and the like. GT4 makes extensive use of Java, C, and Python
to write user code. Web service mechanisms define specific interfaces for grid computing.
Web services provide flexible, extensible, and widely adopted XML-based interfaces.
Job
state
Jo
S
b
E
c
G
ontrol
Schedule
Local
Submit GRAM
scheduler
Job
Delegate
Delegate
Delegation a
G
d
R
ap
A
t
M
or
User job
FTP control
RTF FTP
control
FTP
data
GridFTP
GridFTP
FIGURE 7.19
Globusjobworkflowamonginteractivefunctionalmodules.
(CourtesyofFosterandKesselman[15])


===== page 472 =====
Client
Server
GT4 components do not, in general, address end-user needs directly. Instead, GT4 provides a set
of infrastructure services for accessing, monitoring, managing, and controlling access to infrastruc-
ture elements. The server code in the vertical boxes in Figure 7.22 corresponds to 15 grid services
that are in heavy use in the GT4 library. These demand computational, communication, data, and
storageresources.Wemustenablearangeofend-usertoolsthatprovidethehigher-levelcapabilities
neededinspecificuserapplications.Whereverpossible,GT4 implementsstandardstofacilitatecon-
structionofoperableandreusableusercode.Developerscanusetheseservicesandlibrariestobuild
simpleandcomplexsystemsquickly.
A high-security subsystem addresses message protection, authentication, delegation, and
authorization. Comprising both a set of service implementations (server programs at the bottom
of Figure 7.21) and associated client libraries at the top, GT4 provides both web services and
non-WS applications. The horizontal boxes in the client domain denote custom applications and/
orthird-partytoolsthataccessGT4services.Thetoolkitprogramsprovideasetofusefulinfrastructure
services.
Three containers are used to host user-developed services written in Java, Python, and C, respec-
tively. These containers provide implementations of security, management, discovery, state manage-
ment, and other mechanisms frequently required when building services. They extend open source
service hosting environments with support for a range of useful web service specifications, includ-
ing WSRF, WS-Notification, and WS-Security.
AsetofclientlibrariesallowclientprogramsinJava,C,andPythontoinvokeoperationsonboth
GT4 and user-developed services. In many cases, multiple interfaces provide different levels of
control:Forexample,inthecaseofGridFTP,thereisnotonlyasimplecommand-lineclient(globus-
url-copy)butalsocontrolanddatachannellibrariesforuseinprograms—andtheXIO libraryallow-
ing for the integration of alternative transports. The use of uniform abstractions and mechanisms
means clients can interact with different services in similar ways, which facilitates construction of
complex,interoperablesystemsandencouragescodereuse.
MARG
Java client
ecivres
avaJ
refsnart
eliF
noitagleD xednI reggirT .htua
.mmoC
ssecca
ataD
lortnoceleT
ecivres
nohtyP
ecivres
C
PTFdirG yxorpyM yxorpyM acilpeR
7.4 Software and Middleware for Grid Computing 449
C client Python client
FIGURE7.20
ClientandGT4serverinteractions;verticalboxescorrespondtoserviceprogramsandhorizontalboxes
representtheusercodes.
(CourtesyofFosterandKesselman[15])


===== page 473 =====
Request
Transport
Response
(a) The globus container
7.4.3 Containers and Resources/Data Management
In this section, we introduce the container concept introduced with the GRAM module in the GT4
Toolkit. Then we explain how to use GRAM and MDS in resource and data management in any
open grid. GRAM supports dynamic job execution with coordinated file staging. MDS is used for
monitoring and discovery of available grid resources in a grid execution environment.
7.4.3.1 Resource Management Using GRAM
The GRAM module supports web services for initiating, monitoring, and managing execution of
computational jobs on remote computers in an open grid. GRAM is built atop various local resource
allocation services. A standardized GRAM interface enables access to a variety of local resource
management tools. Some of them are commercially available from cluster and grid computing ven-
dors, such as the Load Sharing Facility introduced in Chapter 2, the Network Queuing Environ-
ment, IBM’s LoadLeveler, and Condor. This interface allows a client to express the resource type
and quantity, data to be staged to and from the execution site, executable code and its arguments,
V
V
Http engine/web server
SOAP engine WS container
Service
dispatcher
SOAP Web
processing service
User applications
Custom web
services
GT4 container
yrtsigeR
noitartsinimda
450 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Custom
GT4 WSRF
WSRF web
web services
services
WS-addressing, WSRF,
WS-notification
WSDL, SOAP, WS-security
(b) Capabilities of a container
FIGURE 7.21
Globuscontainerservingasaruntimeenvironmentforimplementingwebservicesinagridplatform.
(CourtesyofFosterandKesselman[16])


===== page 474 =====
7.4 Software and Middleware for Grid Computing 451
security credentials to be used, and job persistence requirements. Other operations enable clients to
monitor the status of both allocated resources and running tasks and notify users about their status,
as well as guide job execution on the grid.
The heart of GRAM contains a set of web services designed to run the Globus Web Services
Resource Framework (WSRF) core hosting environment. Each submitted job is exposed with a dis-
tinct resource qualifying the requested service. The service provides an interface to monitor the sta-
tus of the job or to terminate the job. Each compute element is accessed through a local scheduler.
The service provides an interface to create the managed job resources to perform a job in that local
scheduler, as illustrated in the job workflow diagram.
7.4.3.2 Globus Container: A Runtime Environment
The Globus Container (also called a web service core or WS container) provides a basic runtime
environment for hosting the web services needed to execute grid jobs. Figure 7.21(a) shows the
container concept. The container is built with heavy use of SOAP engines. The main SOAP func-
tions performed include the transport of incoming job requests and corresponding responses. It is
also common to partition the hosting environment logic for transporting the SOAP message via an
HTTP engine or web server.
Figure 7.21(b) summarizes the capabilities of the containers. All WS containers implement the
SOAP commands over the HTTP engine as a message transport protocol. Both transport-level and
message-level security is enforced in all communications. The WS-addressing, WSRF, and WS-
Notification functions are implemented. The container supports logging using the Jakarta logging
API. The container defines WSRF WS-Resources for grid services deployed in the container. Thus,
any GT4 container can host many services to multiple jobs simultaneously.
The container supports custom web services and host services whose client interfaces make use
of WSRF and related mechanisms. The container also hosts advanced services provided by GT4,
such as GRAM, MDS, and RFT. The application clients use the Globus container registry interfaces
to determine which services are hosted in a particular container. The container administration
interfaces are used to perform routine management functions. At the time of this writing, there are
web service containers written in Java, C, and Python in the GT4 suite.
7.4.3.3 Data Management Using GT4
Grid applications often need to provide access to and/or integrate large quantities of data at multiple
sites. The GT4 tools can be used individually or in conjunction with other tools to develop interest-
ing solutions to efficient data access. The following list briefly introduces these GT4 tools:
1. GridFTP supports reliable, secure, and fast memory-to-memory and disk-to-disk data movement
over high-bandwidth WANs. Based on the popular FTP protocol for Internet file transfer,
GridFTP adds additional features such as parallel data transfer, third-party data transfer, and
striped data transfer. In addition, GridFTP benefits from using the strong Globus Security
Infrastructure (GSI to be studied in Section 7.5.5) for securing data channels with authentication
and reusability. It has been reported that the grid has achieved 27 Gbit/second end-to-end
transfer speeds over some WANs.
2. RFT provides reliable management of multiple GridFTP transfers. It has been used to
orchestrate the transfer of millions of files among many sites simultaneously.


===== page 475 =====
452 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
3. RLS (Replica Location Service) is a scalable system for maintaining and providing access to
information about the location of replicated files and data sets.
4. OGSA-DAI (Globus Data Access and Integration) tools were developed by the UK e-Science
program and provide access to relational and XML databases.
7.4.3.4 The MDS Services
Monitoring and discovery are two vital functions in any distributed system. Both tasks require the
abilitytocollectinformationfrommultipledistributedinformationsources.GT4providesmonitoring
anddiscoverysupportatafundamentallevel.Figure7.22showstheGlobusMDSinfrastructure.By
implementingWSRFandWS-Notificationspecifications,GT4enablestheassociationofXML-based
resource properties with network entities. Multiple containers are built to carry out MDS indexing,
GridFTP, and other functions needed to conduct monitoring and discovery of available resources.
Gridservicescanberegisteredwithdistributedcontainers.
Furthermore,GT4providestwoaggregatorservicesthatcollectdatafromanyinformationsource,
whether XML-based or otherwise. In addition, GT4 provides a range of browser-based interfaces,
command-line tools, and web service interfaces that allow users to query and access the collected
information. In particular, the WebMDS service is configured via XSLT transformations to create
specializedviewsoftheindexdata.Thesemechanismsprovideapowerfulframeworkformonitoring
diverse collections of distributed components. Details of GRAM, MDS, and other interesting tools
areavailableattheGT4website:http://www.globus.org/.
7.4.4 The ChinaGrid Support Platform (CGSP)
CGSPwasdevelopedby20universitiesinChinaforbuildingChinaGrid.Thepackageoffersthefirst
step toward multidomain web services. Unlike GT4, CGSP offers a software platform rather than a
toolkit library. CGSP covers everything from user interfaces to the integration of heterogeneous
GT4 container
MDS-index
Adapter
WebDMDS
GT4 container GT4 container
MDS-index MDS-index
GridFTP
GRAM RFT
FIGURE 7.22
GT4systemmonitoringandresourcediscoveryinfrastructure.
(CourtesyofIanFoster[17])


===== page 476 =====
7.4 Software and Middleware for Grid Computing 453
Table 7.8 Functional Components ofthe CGSPLibrary
Component BriefDescription
Servicecontainer Producesabasicenvironmentfortheinstallation,deployment,running,and
monitoringofservices,especiallyCGSPkernelservices
Securitymanager Focusesonuseridentityauthentication,identitymapping,serviceandresource
authorization,andsecuremessagepassingbetweenCGSPnodes
Informationcenter Providesserviceregistration,publishing,metadatamanagement,servicequerying,
servicematching,andresourcestatuscollectionfortheCGSPservicesinauniformway
Datamanager Shieldsusersfromtheheterogeneousnessofunderlyingstorageresourcesto
provideauniformstorageresourceaccessmode
Executionmanager Acceptsusers’jobexecutionrequestsandinvokesrelevantservicesaccordingtothe
jobdescription,andmanagesthejobduringitslifetime
Domainmanager Inchargeofusermanagement,loggingandaccounting,anduseridentitymapping
betweendifferentCGSPdomains
Gridmonitor NamedChinaGridSuperVision(CGSV),mainlyfocusesonthemonitoringofCGSP
resourceload,QoS,useractions,jobstatus,andnetwork,toensurethatthesystem
isrunningnormallyandtoenhancegridperformance
Portal AwebpageforlearningaboutCGSPservicesandprovidingsupportfornewgrid
applications
resources for a given application. It brings the user closer to both grid developers and field experts.
CGSP has been tested in image processing, bioinformatics, distance education, computational fluid
dynamics,andlarge-scaleinformationprocessingonChinaGrid.
Table 7.8 shows the functional blocks built in CGSP. ChinaGrid aims at constructing a public
grid service system for research and higher education in China. CGSP integrates all sorts of hetero-
geneous resources, especially educational and research resources distributed over CERNET in
China. CGSP provides a grid platform for grid construction from the top portal level to the integra-
tion of underlying resources. This system supports uniform management of heterogeneous resources,
portal building, job definitions, service packaging, and grid monitoring. It provides an extensible
grid framework to serve primarily the top 100 universities in China.
The CGSP software platform meets the OGSA standard and the WSRF criteria. All software,
hardware, storage, and network technology becomes virtual resources to the user. Like Globus,
CGSP emphasizes a high degree of resource sharing and cooperation among resources. CGSP com-
prises nine major components, as briefly introduced in Table 7.8. In addition, CGSP provides a set
of APIs and toolkits that enable end users and developers to write grid-enabled programs, and
query and deploy their applications.
7.4.4.1 CGSP Job Execution Flow
Figure 7.24 shows the flow of jobs in CGSP on a single domain. First, the grid service containers
should include the allocated resources. The resources are extracted through a service packaging tool
and are included in the service containers, The three symbols, S1, S2, and S3, represent the com-
mand-line software, legacy program, and service requested, respectively. We need to use a job defi-
nition tool to model the workflow of a job. Because job requests are submitted via SOAP
messages, the job manager is deployed in the service container.


===== page 477 =====
454 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
User Developer
Domain manager Grid monitor
Information Execution Data
center manager manager
Grid
Security manager
Grid development
portal tool kit
Service container
CGSP system modules
FIGURE 7.23
FunctionalbuildingblocksintheCGSPlibraryforChinaGrid,developedbyTsinghuaUniversity,China[53].
The job manager is responsible for job request analysis, service selection, and job scheduling
and execution management. Each domain needs to deploy a service manager which collects service
information from containers to support other software modules. In addition, each domain has to
deploy a domain manager to implement the functions of user management and other issues. Lastly,
one or more grid portals can be deployed to satisfy specific needs of different specialties. A portal
development tool can help users to develop web applications that satisfy interaction requirements
and can be deployed in the portal.
Afteranapplicationisdeployed,thefollowingstepsaretakingplace,asillustratedinFigure7.24in
8steps.Moredetailscanbefoundin[53].
1. The user should register and acquire the certificate signed by ChinaGrid. Then the user logs in
to the grid portal through a certain security protocol (such as HTTPS) and interacts with the
grid system through web applications deployed in the portal.
2. If necessary, the user uploads the input data required by the computing job/request to the
personal data space in the data manager. Then the user can define a job (such as J1) by using
the job defining tool. The job definition is then sent to the job manager.
3. According to the job process rule in J1, which is stored locally, the job manager queries
available services from the information center and helps to complete job J1.
4. The information center collects the service information using a “push/pull” model. It maintains
the resource view so that it can return an available service list sorted by a certain rule. In
principle, the information center will return local available services. If necessary, it will query
other information centers for more available services if it cannot find a service satisfying the
requirement in its own domain.
5. The job manager selects service S2 and sends it to the allocated computing node.
6. After service containers receive the requests, they need to invoke the access interfaces provided
by the data manager in order to get the data by a logical file path in the unified data space.
Then the service containers execute the services.


===== page 478 =====
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 455
CA
Global
Local
J1 J2
Web app Container S1 CMD
2 Job manager 5 Request for S2
Request for J1
1 Portal
Container 7 S2 Legacy
program
3 Container
4
Available S3 Remote
Job information services S2 resources
Domain Resource 6
manager information Information Retrieve Container S4
center input data
Retrieve data
Data management Storage
Management Programming Installation
Tools set Resource wrapping Job definition tools Portal tools
GUI models tools
tools
Administrators Resource providers Developers and grid constructors Programmers
FIGURE7.24
ThejobexecutionsequenceinusingtheCGSPonChinaGrid[53].
7. The job manager continuously collects the services’ status in the execution processes to report
the information to the user through the portal.
8. When the job is completed, the service container moves the computing results to the personal
data space in the data manager.
7.5 GRID APPLICATION TRENDS AND SECURITY MEASURES
In this final section, we assess the application trends of grid computing, in line with the progress of
related theories and technologies such as game theory, fuzzy trust model, virtualized data centers,
and the growth of the clouds. Users and resources from multiple administrative organizations are
involved in a grid. We need to prevent not only network attacks to data and resources, but also
combat the selfishness of grid users and remove the distrust among users.
More importantly, we should be aware of the security challenges in grid applications. We need
to establish a trust mode for grid computing. The principles of some grid security enforcement
schemes and mechanisms are presented, based on the lessons learned from the GridSec Project at
the University of Southern California [29,39,40]. Specifically, we describe methods to cope with
the problems of user authentication and resource-access authorization.


===== page 479 =====
456 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.5.1 Grid Applications and Technology Fusion
Grid computing has been applied to solve computation-intensive problems in scientific discovery,
engineering design, environment protection, and government management areas. The virtual grids
have been applied in solving difficult academic and mathematical problems through volunteer com-
puting. In commercial enterprise, many companies are using grids for drug discovery, economic
forecasting, seismic analysis, e-commerce, and cloud services. We see a trend that calls for the
fusion of computing, communication, and future Internet technologies. In what follows, we first
review the theories and technologies that are relevant to grid computing. Then we present an exam-
ple to use game theory to cope with the selfishness problem in P2P and grid users.
7.5.1.1 Relevant Theories and Technologies
Grid computing is related to many other computing concepts and technologies. Just to name a few:
clouds,clusters,P2P,parallelprocessing,anddistributedcomputingarecloselyrelevanttothedevelop-
mentofgridtechnology.Otherareaslikeedgecomputing,gridfilesystems,e-science,metacomputing,
scientificworkflowsystems,andsemanticgridsareallrelated.InTable7.9,weidentifyafewrelated
theoriesandtechnologiesthathaveimpactedthedevelopmentofefficientgridsinthefuture.Therele-
vantchaptersorsectionsinthisbookarealsoidentifiedinthetable.InExample7.11,wediscusshow
gametheorycanbeappliedtoupgradethegridperformanceinreal-lifepractice.
7.5.1.2 Fusion of Technologies with Theories
Manytheoriesandmathematicssuchasgraphtheory,fuzzysets,gametheory,etc.canbeappliedto
upgrade the computing technology, if proper fusion among them is performed. For example, fuzzy
theory and reputation systems can be applied for trust management in grids and P2P systems [41].
The performance of grids, clouds, and distributed systems can be improved with optimization and
game theory [30,42]. In Example 7.11, we show how to apply game theory to achieve a win-win
optimizationsituationandtoavoidselfishbehaviorsindegradingthegridandcloudapplications.
Table 7.9 Grid ComputingandRelevant Theories andTechnologies
Theory/Technology FusionTrendandRelevantChapters
CloudComputing Cloudandgridtechnologiessharesomecommonresourcesand
infrastructures.Theyaregraduallymerginginhigh-techandserviceindustries.
(Chapters4–6)
P2PComputing VolunteergridcomputingcanbenefitfromP2Pcomputingtechnology
(Chapter8)
HPandHACluster Supercomputersappearinvariousnetworkplatforms,notrestrictedto
Systems centralizedMPPorhigh-performanceorhigh-availabilityclusters(Chapter2)
DataCenterAutomation Throughvirtualization,theboundariesamongdatacenters,cloudsand
supercomputersareblurred.(Chapters3,4,9)
FuzzyTheoryand Fuzzy theoryandreputation systemscan beappliedfortrustmanagement
ReputationSystems ingrids, clouds,and anydistributed systems (Sec.7.5.2, Sec.7.5.3and
Sec.8.4[42])
Game-Theoretic Gametheorycanbeappliedtoachievewin-winoptimizationandavoidselfish
Optimization behaviorsindegradinggridandcloudapplications(Example7.11and[29])


===== page 480 =====
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 457
Example 7.11 Selfish Grids and A Game-Theoretic Solution
Gridresourceownershavethetendencytogivehigherprioritytoschedulejobssubmittedbylocalortrusted
users,againstthejobsfromremoteorunknownusers.Thisbehaviorisknownasselfishgrids.Agridwitha
selfishjobschedulingpolicywilldowngradetheoverallgridperformanceorqualityofservicetounknown
users,especiallyinanuntrustedgridusercommunity.TheselfishsituationisillustratedinFigure7.25.For
example,resourcesite1actsinfavorofjobsfromfriendsoverjobssubmittedbyfoesatsite3.Site2may
refusetooutsourcegridjobsatallordelaythemrandomly.Site4willencouragetooutsourceasmuchas
possible.Thesebehaviorswilldestroytheloadbalancingpolicyorthefairnesspolicybythegridschedulers.
Thatiswhytheoverallgridperformancemaysuffer.In2007,Kwok,Hwang,andSong[30]haveproposed
agame-theoreticapproachtosolvingthisselfishproblem.Theideaistomodelthegridresourceallocationas
anon-cooperativegameamongmultipleplayers.Weneedtoprovideastrategicpolicytoachieveanall-win
situationbyallparties(users)involved.Alluserjobscompetingforthesameresourcespoolmustinteractwith
eachothertoreachaNashEquilibrium[35],bywhichthegridsystemcanachievea“semi-optimal”through-
put among all jobs processed. The authors also verifiedthe game-theoretic scheduling strategy by NAS
benchmarkexperimentstoshowitseffectiveness.Theproofcanbefoundin[30].
7.5.2 Grid Workload and Performance Prediction
Grid performance is directly related to the collective workload to be executed on a large number of
processorsinparticipatinggridsites.Predictingthecollectivegridworkloadisaverychallengingtask,
becauseheterogeneousresourcesarehighlydistributedunderthecontrolofdifferentorganizations.The
gridworkloadisrepresentedbyacollectiveloadindexamongallprocessors.TheloadindexX(t)isthe
percentage ofprocessorsutilizedwithin a unit time interval [t−1,t]. All discrete time instances tare
denotedbynon-negativeintegers.Forsimplicity,assumefiveminutespertimestep.Loadindexreflects
theCPUutilizationrateamongallprocessorsinagrid.Forexample,X(t)=0.45impliesthat45percent
oftheprocessorsarebusyduringtheobservationperiod.
Do not outsource
1st, friend → Accept
delay is okay...
2nd, foe → Reject
Take some risk to run
... ...
Site 1 Site 2
Site 3 Site 4
I will outsource to
a friendly site
FIGURE7.25
Aconceptualexampletoillustratetheselfishgridproblemandagame-theoreticalsolution.
(CourtesyofKwok,Hwang,andSong[30],2007)


===== page 481 =====
Traditional point-value prediction methods apply a very short prediction window. Although they
may work well to predict CPU load in centralized computer systems, they do not work well on
large-scale production grids due to the long execution time expected. In fact, point-value prediction
can hardly cover workload fluctuation in a long time frame. In general, the load index is used to
estimate the percentage of peak performance achievable on a given computational grid. The man-
agement console of such a grid can monitor CPU utilization.
Workload managers in large grid infrastructures are notoriously weak in determining correct
scheduling scenarios, which affects the application execution time on the grid. This section dis-
cusses predicting future workload within a reasonable confidence range. The narrower the prediction
range, the higher the accuracy of prediction. Long-range workload prediction is bound to have some
errors. But we try to minimize these prediction errors by using look-ahead filtering techniques
within a trainable confidence window.
7.5.2.1 Adaptive Workload Prediction
We introduce in Figure 7.26 an adaptive workload prediction process by a time series of events.
The current time is marked at t. The real workload is shown by a series of dots up to time t. The
future load indices can only be predicted beyond time t. The conventional prediction scheme, like
the AR(p) method, predicts the future load indices using load information from the past p point
values. The predicted point values are marked by stars in Figure 7.28. An n-step look-ahead process
predicts the load index X(t+n) using all load data in a historical interval w plus predicted load
values in a look-ahead span of n time steps beyond t. Instead of predicting a point value, which
may not be accurate due to load fluctuation, we use a confidence window to predict X(t+n) within
a range {X(t+n), X (t+n)}.
l u
Workload traces on two French grids are introduced in this section. Sampling errors are
analyzed. Two grid workload traces come from the AuverGrid and Grid’5000 in France. AuverGrid
is a production grid, built over five clusters totaling 475 processors, which are geographically scat-
tered around the Auvergne area of France. Grid’5000 is an experimental grid platform, built over
Historical real workload value Window predicted
Predicted point value by HModel &
AHModel
100
Workload Point value
50 predicted by
AR(p)
Time
)%(
)t(X
xedni
daoL
458 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
t t+n
0
p
n
w
FIGURE 7.26
Adaptivepredictionofgridworkloadusingconfidencewindowsderivedfromhistoricalloadinformationand
projectedloadinlookaheadwindow.
(CourtesyofWu,Hwang,Yuan,andZheng[55],2010)


===== page 482 =====
5,000 processors in nine sites throughout France. The Grid Workloads Archive (GWA) collected the
workload traces.
7.5.2.2 Workload Traces on Grid’5000
The grid workload traces on Grid’5000 are shown in Figure 7.27 based on traced experiments con-
ducted in 2006. Job log entries of Grid’5000 consist of two types: those that ran successfully and
those that failed. Measurement errors were possibly caused by failed jobs or by erroneous job
entries. The average workload on Grid’5000 is 10.6 percent. During an observation period of 10
months, Grid’5000 was lightly loaded and fluctuated around the average load. We collected three
traces: Trace 1 for sudden local changes, Trace 2 for sudden level changes, and Trace 3 for gradual
level changes in these performance prediction experiments.
7.5.2.3 Auto-Regression (AR) Method
An auto-regression prediction method was reported in [18] and [46]. The method applies a time
sequence of load samples, X(t). The coefficients used in the AR method are estimated from past
load data sequences. These coefficients are used to predict future load sequence. The AR prediction
p
method is specified by XðtÞ=∑φXðt−1Þ+ε at time t, where p is the traceback span, called the
i t
i=1
order of the prediction method. The first term gives an estimated value of the current load index
by a weighted sum of past p load values. The p coefficients {φ} are trained from past workload.
i
The ε term covers the noise at time t, where p is the traceback span, called the order of the predic-
t
tion method.
Thefirsttermgivesanestimatedvalueofthecurrentloadindexbyaweightedsumofpastpload
values.Thepcoefficients{φ}aretrainedfrompastworkload.Theε termcoversthenoiseattimet.
i t
Inessence,theAR(p)modelpredictstheloadindexX(t+1)attimetbasedonthepastploadvalues
{X(t), X(t−1), …., X(t−p+1)} using the coefficients fφ ,φ ,…φ g The larger the order p of the
1 2 p
AR(p)method,thehigherthepredictionaccuracyexpected.ThisARmethodneedstofindtheaccu-
rate coefficientsφ,basedon pastloadindices X(t−i). The method assumesthatthe seriesX(t−i)is
i
linearandstationary.TheloadseriesX(t−i)shouldbemaintainedtohaveazeromeanvalue.
35
30
20
)%(
daoL
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 459
10
0
01/06 04/06 07/06 10/06
FIGURE7.27
WorkloadvariationintheGrid’5000fromJan.toOct.2006.


===== page 483 =====
460 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.5.2.4 H-Model for Workload Prediction
The hybrid model (H-Model) is an n-step look-ahead workload prediction method specified in
Algorithm 7.1. Two linear arrays A(i) and A (i) are used to represent the lower bound and upper
l u
bound of confidence window values. The confidence range is specified by a pair of point values
{X(t), X (t)}. After the n-step look-ahead confidence window is computed, the Savitzky-Golay filter
l u
is used to smooth the confidence windows. The evaluation checks different trace time span
p parameters in the kernel AR(p) computation against the historical interval w used. These two
parameters {p, w} have a major impact on prediction accuracy. The optimal choice of the window
size w varies with the workload.
The track span p has less impact on the prediction error. Fixed parameter values in the
H-Model may not predict accurately. The confidence window C(t+n) is characterized as
X±L/2, where L=|X (t+n)−X(t+n)| is the length of the confidence window predicted at time
u l
t+n. A default value of ε=5% is applied. In general, we should use a smaller historical interval
w, when n has a smaller or moderate value (say, fewer than 30 time steps). The smaller the con-
fidence window used, the higher the chance of aiding task scheduling or load balancing in a pro-
duction grid environment.
7.5.2.5 Adaptive Prediction Scheme (AH-Model)
Extending the H-Model, an adaptive hybrid model (AH-Model) can be implemented using the his-
torical interval, which is dynamically trained and validated from past workload series. Two adapta-
tions are integrated to capture the workload changes dynamically. The proper choice of historical
interval w can reduce the prediction error. The purpose is to minimize the prediction errors (MSE or
mean square error) by training the historical window.
ALGORITHM 7.1 HYBRID MODEL FOR WORKLOAD PREDICTION WITHIN CONFIDENCE
INTERVAL
Input:ARmodelparameterp,workloadindexX(t),look-aheadspann,historicalintervalw
Output:Confidencewindow{X(t+n),X (t+n)}forn-steplook-aheadprediction
l u
Procedure:
1.ProducetherefinedworkloadindexX(t);//usingKalmanfilteronworkloadindexX(t)//
2.GeneratesmoothedworkloadindexX(t);
//usingSavitzky-GolayfilteronrefinedworkloadindexX(t)//
3.Predictworkloadindexseries[X(t+1),..,X(t+n)]
//usingAlgorithm9.1onsmoothedloads[X(t−p),..,X(t)]//
4.foralli=1ton
5.FormA(i)=smoothedloadindex[X(t−w+1),..,X(t)]
followedbypredictedloadindices[X(t+1),..,X(t+i)]
6.Computeconfidencewindow{X(t+i),X (t+i)}ofA(i)toyield
l u
A(i)=X(t+i)andA (i)=X (t+i)
l l u u
7.endforall
8.GeneratesmoothedA ,A //usingSavitzky-Golayfilter//
ls us
9.GenerateX(t+n)=A (n),thelowerendofconfidencewindow
l ls
GenerateX (t+n)=A (n),theupperendofconfidencewindow
u us


===== page 484 =====
7.5.2.6 Benchmark Results on the Grid’5000 System
We report experimental results on implementing the AH-Model in both AuverGrid and Grid’5000
(Figure 7.28). The average MSEs of the AH-Model in two implementations are compared with the
best AR model. The AR method leads to an MSE in the range [2% ~ 30%] on both machines. The
window-based AH-Model has the lowest MSEs, between [0.1% ~ 0.7%]. We reveal the relative per-
formance of the adaptive prediction scheme AH-Model, compared with the hybrid prediction
scheme H-Model. To simplify the comparison, both schemes apply the median of the confidence
window in making predictions. The results are shown in Figure 7.30 based on trace experiments on
the AuverGrid and Grid’5000, respectively.
The point-value AR method is inadequate to predict workload in computational grids, because
they cannot cover load variations in a long execution environment. We developed two new look-
ahead workload prediction schemes for assessing long-term grid performance under fluctuating
loads. We obtained encouraging results to demonstrate the effectiveness of our new prediction
schemes. The main idea is to extend the point value to a confidence window, which is dynamically
adjusted against load variations. The adaptation is done by adjusting the historical interval.
7.5.3 Trust Models for Grid Security Enforcement
Many potential security issues may occur in a grid environment if qualified security mechanisms are
not in place. These issues include network sniffers, out-of-control access, faulty operation, malicious
operation, integration of local security mechanisms, delegation, dynamic resources and services,
attack provenance, and so on. Computational grids are motivated by the desire to share processing
resources among many organizations to solve large-scale problems. Indeed, grid sites may exhibit
unacceptable security conditions and system vulnerabilities.
100
10
1
0.1 0.1
0 0
10 20 30 40 50 10
Lookahead span n
(a) AuverGrid
)%(
rorre
erauqs
naeM
)%(
rorre
erauqs
naeM
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 461
100
10
1
20 30 40 50
Lookahead span n
(b) Grid’5000
“Best” AR model prediction
Window based prediction using AH-Model
Median window based prediction using AH-Model
FIGURE7.28
MeansquareerrorsoftwoimplementationsofAH-Model,comparedwiththebestMSEbyusingtheARmodel.
(CourtesyofWu,Hwang,Yuan,andZheng[55],2010)


===== page 485 =====
462 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
On the one hand, a user job demands the resource site to provide security assurance by issuing a
security demand (SD). On the other hand, the site needs to reveal its trustworthiness, called its trust
index (TI). These two parameters must satisfy a security-assurance condition: TI ≥ SD during the
job mapping process. When determining its security demand, users usually care about some typical
attributes. These attributes and their values are dynamically changing and depend heavily on the
trust model, security policy, accumulated reputation, self-defense capability, attack history, and site
vulnerability. Three challenges are outlined below to establish the trust among grid sites [39].
The first challenge is integration with existing systems and technologies. The resources sites in a
grid are usually heterogeneous and autonomous. It is unrealistic to expect that a single type of
security can be compatible with and adopted by every hosting environment. At the same time, exist-
ing security infrastructure on the sites cannot be replaced overnight. Thus, to be successful, grid
security architecture needs to step up to the challenge of integrating with existing security architec-
ture and models across platforms and hosting environments.
The second challenge is interoperability with different “hosting environments.” Services are
often invoked across multiple domains, and need to be able to interact with one another. The intero-
peration is demanded at the protocol, policy, and identity levels. For all these levels, interoperation
must be protected securely. The third challenge is to construct trust relationships among interacting
hosting environments. Grid service requests can be handled by combining resources on multiple
security domains. Trust relationships are required by these domains during the end-to-end traversals.
A service needs to be open to friendly and interested entities so that they can submit requests and
access securely.
Resource sharing among entities is one of the major goals of grid computing. A trust relation-
ship must be established before the entities in the grid interoperate with one another. The entities
have to choose other entities that can meet the requirements of trust to coordinate with. The entities
that submit requests should believe the resource providers will try to process their requests and
return the results with a specified QoS. To create the proper trust relationship between grid entities,
two kinds of trust models are often used. One is the PKI-based model, which mainly exploits the
PKI to authenticate and authorize entities; we will discuss this in the next section. The other is the
reputation-based model.
The grid aims to construct a large-scale network computing system by integrating distributed,
heterogeneous, and autonomous resources. The security challenges faced by the grid are much
greater than other computing systems. Before any effective sharing and cooperation occurs, a trust
relationship has to be established among participants. Otherwise, not only will participants be
reluctant to share their resources and services, but also the grid may cause a lot of damage [63].
7.5.3.1 A Generalized Trust Model
Figure 7.29 shows a general trust model. At the bottom, we identify three major factors which influ-
ence the trustworthiness of a resource site. An inference module is required to aggregate these fac-
tors. Followings are some existing inference or aggregation methods. An intra-site fuzzy inference
procedure is called to assess defense capability and direct reputation. Defense capability is decided
by the firewall, intrusion detection system (IDS), intrusion response capability, and anti-virus capa-
city of the individual resource site. Direct reputation is decided based on the job success rate, site
utilization, job turnaround time, and job slowdown ratio measured. Recommended trust is also
known as secondary trust and is obtained indirectly over the grid network.


===== page 486 =====
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 463
Security demand
Trustworthiness
Inference & aggregation
Defense capacity Recommendation trust Direct reputation
Intrusion detection Firewall Job success rate Site utilization
Response capabilities Anti-virus capacity Job turnaround time Job slowdown ratio
FIGURE7.29
Ageneraltrustmodelforgridcomputing.
(CourtesyofSong,Hwang,andKwok[43],2005)
7.5.3.2 Reputation-Based Trust Model
In a reputation-based model, jobs are sent to a resource site only when the site is trustworthy to
meet users’ demands. The site trustworthiness is usually calculated from the following information:
the defense capability, direct reputation, and recommendation trust. The defense capability refers to
the site’s ability to protect itself from danger. It is assessed according to such factors as intrusion
detection, firewall, response capabilities, anti-virus capacity, and so on. Direct reputation is based
on experiences of prior jobs previously submitted to the site. The reputation is measured by many
factors such as prior job execution success rate, cumulative site utilization, job turnaround time, job
slowdown ratio, and so on. A positive experience associated with a site will improve its reputation.
On the contrary, a negative experience with a site will decrease its reputation.
7.5.3.3 A Fuzzy-Trust Model
In this model [42], the job security demand (SD) is supplied by the user programs. The trust index
(TI) of a resource site is aggregated through the fuzzy-logic inference process over all related para-
meters. Specifically, one can use a two-level fuzzy logic to estimate the aggregation of numerous
trust parameters and security attributes into scalar quantities that are easy to use in the job schedul-
ing and resource mapping process.
The TI is normalized as a single real number with 0 representing the condition with the highest
risk at a site and 1 representing the condition which is totally risk-free or fully trusted. The fuzzy
inference is accomplished through four steps: fuzzification, inference, aggregation, and defuzzifica-
tion. The second salient feature of the trust model is that if a site’s trust index cannot match the job
security demand (i.e., SD>TI), the trust model could deduce detailed security features to guide the
site security upgrade as a result of tuning the fuzzy system.


===== page 487 =====
464 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.5.4 Authentication and Authorization Methods
The major authentication methods in the grid include passwords, PKI, and Kerberos. The password
is the simplest method to identify users, but the most vulnerable one to use. The PKI is the most
popular method supported by GSI. To implement PKI, we use a trusted third party, called the certi-
ficate authority (CA). Each user applies a unique pair of public and private keys. The public keys
are issued by the CA by issuing a certificate, after recognizing a legitimate user. The private key is
exclusive for each user to use, and is unknown to any other users. A digital certificate in IEEE
X.509 format consists of the user name, user public key, CA name, and a secrete signature of the
user. The following example illustrates the use of a PKI service in a grid environment.
Example 7.12 Trust Delegation Using the Proxy Credential in GSI
The PKI is not strong enough for user authentication in a grid. Figure 7.30 shows a scenario where a
sequenceoftrustdelegationisnecessary.BobandCharliebothtrustAlice,butCharliedoesnottrustBob.
Now,AlicesubmitsataskZtoBob.ThetaskZdemandsmanyresourcesforBobtouse,independently.
BobforwardsasubtaskYofZtoCharlie.BecauseCharliedoesnottrustBobandisnotsurewhetherYis
reallyoriginallyrequestedbyAlice,thesubtaskYfromBobisrejectedforresourcesbyCharlie.
For Charlie to accept the subtask Y, Bob needs to show Charlie some proof of entrust from Alice.
A proxy credential is the solution proposed by GSI. A proxy credential is a temporary certificate generated
byauser.Twobenefitsareseenbyusingproxycredentials.First,theproxycredentialisusedbyitsholder
to act on behalf of the original user or the delegating party. A user can temporarily delegate his right to a
proxy. Second, single sign-on can be achieved with a sequence of credentials passed along the trust
chain. The delegatingparty(Alice) neednot verify the remote intermediateparties in a trustchain.
The only difference between the proxy credential and a digital certificate is that the proxy credential is
not signed by a CA. We need to known the relationship among the certificates of the CA and Alice, and
proxy credential of Alice. The CA certificate is signed first with its own private key. Second, the certificate
Alice holds is signed with the private key of the CA. Finally, the proxy credential sent to her proxy (Bob) is
signed with her private key. The procedure delegates the rights of Alice to Bob by using the proxy
credential.
4. Verify Alice 3. Verify
proxy credential certificate of Alice
Alice Bob Charlie The CA
1. Generate 2. Request &
alice proxy Alice proxy
credential credential
Private key Certificate Private Certificate Private key Certificate Private key Certificate
of Alice of Alice key of Bob of Charlie of Charlie of CA of CA
FIGURE 7.30
InteractionsamongmultiplepartiesinasequenceoftrustdelegationoperationsusingthePKIservicesina
GT4-enabledgridenvironment.


===== page 488 =====
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 465
1 4
Authorization
Subject Resource
authority
2 3
2 1
Authorization
Resource Subject
authority
3 4
4 3
Authorization
Subject Resource
authority
1 2
FIGURE7.31
Threeauthorizationmodels:thesubject-pushmodel,resource-pullingmodel,andtheauthorizationagent
model.
First, the generation of the proxy credential is similar to the procedure of generating a user certificate
in the traditional PKI. Second, when Bob acts on behalf of Alice, he sends the request together with
Alice’s proxy credential and the Alice certificate to Charlie. Third, after obtaining the proxy credential,
Charlie finds out that the proxy credential is signed by Alice. So he tries to verify the identity of Alice and
finds Alice trustable. Finally, Charlie accepts Bob’s requests on behalf of Alice. This is called a trust
delegation chain.
7.5.4.1 Authorization for Access Control
Theauthorizationis aprocesstoexerciseaccesscontrolofsharedresources.Decisions can bemade
eitherattheaccesspointofserviceoratacentralizedplace.Typically,theresourceisahostthatpro-
vides processors and storageforservicesdeployedonit. Based on asetpredefinedpoliciesorrules,
the resource may enforce access for local services. The central authority is a special entity which is
capableofissuingandrevokingpolicesofaccessrightsgrantedtoremoteaccesses.Theauthoritycan
be classified into three categories: attribute authorities, policy authorities, and identity authorities.
Attributeauthoritiesissueattributeassertions;policyauthoritiesissueauthorizationpolicies;identity
authoritiesissuecertificates.Theauthorizationservermakesthefinalauthorizationdecision.
7.5.4.2 Three Authorization Models
Figure 7.31 shows three authorization models The subject is the user and the resource refers to the
machine side. The subject-push model is shown at the top diagram. The user conducts handshake
with the authority first and then with the resource site in a sequence. The resource-pulling model
puts the resource in the middle. The user checks the resource first. Then the resource contacts its
authority to verify the request, and the authority authorizes at step 3. Finally the resource accepts or
rejects the request from the subject at step 4. The authorization agent model puts the authority in
the middle. The subject check with the authority at step 1 and the authority makes decisions on the
access of the requested resources. The authorization process is complete at steps 3 and 4 in the
reverse direction.


===== page 489 =====
466 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.5.5 Grid Security Infrastructure (GSI)
Although the grid is increasingly deployed as a common approach to constructing dynamic, interdo-
main, distributed computing and data collaborations, “lack of security/trust between different services”
isstillanimportantchallengeofthegrid.Thegridrequiresasecurityinfrastructurewiththefollowing
properties:easytouse;conformswiththeVO’ssecurityneedswhileworkingwellwithsitepoliciesof
eachresourceprovidersite;andprovidesappropriateauthenticationandencryptionofallinteractions.
The GSI is an important step toward satisfying these requirements. As a well-known security
solution in the grid environment, GSI is a portion of the Globus Toolkit and provides fundamental
security services needed to support grids, including supporting for message protection, authentica-
tion and delegation, and authorization. GSI enables secure authentication and communication over
an open network, and permits mutual authentication across and among distributed sites with single
sign-on capability. No centrally managed security system is required, and the grid maintains the
integrity of its members’ local policies. GSI supports both message-level security, which supports
theWS-SecuritystandardandtheWS-SecureConversationspecificationtoprovidemessageprotection
forSOAPmessages,andtransport-levelsecurity,whichmeansauthenticationviaTLSwithsupportfor
X.509proxycertificates.
7.5.5.1 GSI Functional Layers
GT4providesdistinctWSandpre-WSauthenticationandauthorizationcapabilities.Bothbuildonthe
samebase,namelytheX.509standardandentitycertificates andproxycertificates, whichareusedto
identify persistent entities such as users and servers and to support the temporary delegation of
privilegestootherentities,respectively.AsshowninFigure7.32,GSImaybethoughtofasbeingcom-
posedoffourdistinctfunctions:messageprotection,authentication,delegation,andauthorization.
TLS (transport-level security) or WS-Security and WS-Secure Conversation (message-level) are
used as message protection mechanisms in combination with SOAP. X.509 End Entity Certificates
or Username and Password are used as authentication credentials. X.509 Proxy Certificates and
Message-level Message-level Transport-level
Authorization SAML & grid-mapfile Grid-mapfile SAML & grid-mapfile
X.509 proxy X.509 proxy
Delegation
certificates certificates
X.509 end entity X.509 end entity
Authentication Username/password
certificates certificates
Message WS-Security
WS-Security TLS
protection WS-SecureConversation
Message format SOAP SOAP SOAP
FIGURE 7.32
GSIfunctionallayersatthemessageandtransportlevels.
(SeeBerman,FoxandHey[5],FosterandKesselman[15],andFoster[17]formoredetails)


===== page 490 =====
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 467
WS-Trust are used for delegation. An Authorization Framework allows for a variety of authorization
schemes, including a “grid-mapfile” ACL, an ACL defined by a service, a custom authorization
handler, and access to an authorization service via the SAML protocol. In addition, associated
security tools provide for the storage of X.509 credentials (MyProxy and Delegation services), the
mapping between GSI and other authentication mechanisms (e.g., KX509 and PKINIT for Kerberos,
MyProxy for one-time passwords), and maintenance of information used for authorization (VOMS,
GUMS, PERMIS).
The remainder of this section reviews both the GT implementations of each of these functions
and the standards that are used in these implementations. The web services portions of GT4 use
SOAP as their message protocol for communication. Message protection can be provided either by
transport-level security, which transports SOAP messages over TLS, or by message-level security,
which is signing and/or encrypting portions of the SOAP message using the WS-Security standard.
Here we describe these two methods.
7.5.5.2 Transport-Level Security
Transport-levelsecurityentailsSOAPmessagesconveyedoveranetworkconnectionprotectedbyTLS.
TLS provides for both integrity protection and privacy (via encryption). Transport-level security is
normally used in conjunction with X.509 credentialsforauthentication, but can also be usedwithout
suchcredentialstoprovidemessageprotectionwithoutauthentication,oftenreferredtoas“anonymous
transport-level security.” In this mode of operation, authentication may be done by username and
passwordinaSOAPmessage.
7.5.5.3 Message-Level Security
GSI also provides message-level security for message protection for SOAP messages by implement-
ing the WS-Security standard and the WS-Secure Conversation specification. The WS-Security
standard from OASIS defines a framework for applying security to individual SOAP messages;
WS-Secure Conversation is a proposed standard from IBM and Microsoft that allows for an initial
exchange of messages to establish a security context which can then be used to protect subsequent
messages in a manner that requires less computational overhead (i.e., it allows the trade-off of initial
overhead for setting up the session for lower overhead for messages).
GSI conforms to this standard. GSI uses these mechanisms to provide security on a per-message
basis, that is, to an individual message without any preexisting context between the sender and
receiver (outside of sharing some set of trust roots). GSI, as described further in the subsequent
section on authentication, allows for both X.509 public key credentials and the combination of user-
name and password for authentication; however, differences still exist. With username/password,
only the WS-Security standard can be used to allow for authentication; that is, a receiver can verify
the identity of the communication initiator.
GSI allows three additional protection mechanisms. The first is integrity protection, by which a
receivercanverifythatmessageswerenotalteredintransitfromthesender.Thesecondisencryption,
bywhichmessagescanbeprotectedtoprovideconfidentiality.Thethirdisreplayprevention,bywhich
a receiver can verify that it has not received the same message previously. These protections are
provided betweenWS-SecurityandWS-SecureConversation.The former appliesthekeysassociated
withthesenderandreceiver’sX.509credentials.TheX.509credentialsareusedtoestablishasession
keythatisusedtoprovidethemessageprotection.


===== page 491 =====
468 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
7.5.5.4 Authentication and Delegation
GSI has traditionally supported authentication and delegation through the use of X.509 certificates
and public keys. As a new feature in GT4, GSI also supports authentication through plain user-
names and passwords as a deployment option. We discuss both methods in this section. GSI uses
X.509 certificates to identify persistent users and services.
As a central concept in GSI authentication, a certificate includes four primary pieces of informa-
tion: (1) a subject name, which identifies the person or object that the certificate represents; (2) the
public key belonging to the subject; (3) the identity of a CA that has signed the certificate to certify
that the public key and the identity both belong to the subject; and (4) the digital signature of the
named CA. X.509 provides each entity with a unique identifier (i.e., a distinguished name) and a
method to assert that identifier to another party through the use of an asymmetric key pair bound to
the identifier by the certificate.
The X.509 certificate used by GSI are conformant to the relevant standards and conventions.
Grid deployments around the world have established their own CAs based on third-party soft-
ware to issue the X.509 certificate for use with GSI and the Globus Toolkit. GSI also supports
delegation and single sign-on through the use of standard X.509 proxy certificates. Proxy certifi-
cates allow bearers of X.509 to delegate their privileges temporarily to another entity. For the
purposes of authentication and authorization, GSI treats certificates and proxy certificates equiva-
lently. Authentication with X.509 credentials can be accomplished either via TLS, in the case of
transport-level security, or via signature as specified by WS-Security, in the case of message-level
security.
Example 7.13 Mutual Authentication between Two Parties
Mutual authentication is a process by which two parties with certificates signed by the CA prove to each
other that they are who they say they are based on the certificate and the trust of the CAs that signed
each other’s certificates. GSI uses the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) for its mutual authentication protocol,
which is described in Figure 7.33. To mutually authenticate, the first person (Alice) establishes a connec-
tion tothe second person (Bob)to start theauthentication process.
Alice gives Bob her certificate. The certificate tells Bob who Alice is claiming to be (the identity), what
Alice’s public key is, and what CA is being used to certify the certificate. Bob will first make sure the certi-
ficate is valid by checking the CA’s digital signature to make sure the CA actually signed the certificate
and the certificate hasn’t been tampered with. Once Bob has checked out Alice’s certificate, Bob must
makesure Alicereallyis the person identified inthe certificate.
Bob generates a random message and sends it to Alice, asking Alice to encrypt it. Alice encrypts the
message using her private key, and sends it back to Bob. Bob decrypts the message using Alice’s public
key. If this results in the original random message, Bob knows Alice is who she says she is. Now that Bob
trusts Alice’s identity, the same operation must happen in reverse. Bob sends Alice his certificate, and
Alice validates the certificate and sends a challenge message to be encrypted. Bob encrypts the message
and sends it back to Alice, and Alice decrypts it and compares it with the original. If it matches, Alice
knows Bob iswho hesaysheis.


===== page 492 =====
7.5 Grid Application Trends and Security Measures 469
Alice Bob
Authentication request: EEC(Alice)-ID,
pub-key, CA
Checking valid
Challenge message to encrypt
Encrypt with private key
Encrypted challenge message
Decrypt with pub-key
EEC(Bob)-ID, pub-key, CA
Checking valid
Challenge message to encrypt
Encrypt with private key
Decrypt with pub-key
Encrypted challenge message
FIGURE7.33
Multiplehandshakinginamutualauthenticationscheme.
(CourtesyofFosterandKesselman[15],2002)
7.5.5.5 Trust Delegation
To reduce or even avoid the number of times the user must enter his passphrase when several grids
areusedorhaveagents(localorremote)requestingservicesonbehalfofauser,GSIprovidesadele-
gationcapability anda delegation service thatprovidesaninterface to allowclientsto delegate (and
renew) X.509 proxy certificates to a service. The interface to this service is based on the WS-Trust
specification.Aproxyconsistsofanewcertificateandaprivatekey.Thekeypairthatisusedforthe
proxy,thatis, thepublickeyembeddedinthecertificate and the private key,may eitherberegener-
atedforeachproxyorbeobtainedbyothermeans.Thenewcertificatecontainstheowner’sidentity,
modifiedslightlytoindicatethatitisaproxy.Thenewcertificateissignedbytheowner,ratherthan
aCA(seeFigure7.34).
The certificate also includes a time notation after which the proxy should no longer be accepted
by others. Proxies have limited lifetimes. Because the proxy isn’t valid for very long, it doesn’t
have to stay quite as secure as the owner’s private key, and thus it is possible to store the proxy’s
private key in a local storage system without being encrypted, as long as the permissions on the file
prevent anyone else from looking at them easily. Once a proxy is created and stored, the user can
use the proxy certificate and private key for mutual authentication without entering a password.
When proxies are used, the mutual authentication process differs slightly. The remote party receives
not only the proxy’s certificate (signed by the owner), but also the owner’s certificate.
During mutual authentication, the owner’s public key (obtained from her certificate) is used to
validate the signature on the proxy certificate. The CA’s public key is then used to validate the


===== page 493 =====
470 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
CA User Proxy Proxy
1 n
Sign Sign Sign
Signature Signature Signature Signature
FIGURE 7.34
AsequenceoftrustdelegationsinwhichnewcertificatesaresignedbytheownersratherbytheCA.
signature on the owner’s certificate. This establishes a chain of trust from the CA to the last proxy
through the successive owners of resources. The GSI uses WS-Security with textual usernames and
passwords. This mechanism supports more rudimentary web service applications. When using user-
names and passwords as opposed to X.509 credentials, the GSI provides authentication, but no
advanced security features such as delegation, confidentiality, integrity, and replay prevention.
However, one can use usernames and passwords with anonymous transport-level security such as
unauthenticated TLS to ensure privacy.
7.6 BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES AND HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Introduction to grid computing can be found in [6,12,36,52]. Comprehensive treatment of grid com-
puting can be found in Foster and Kesselman [15] and Berman, Fox, and Hey [5]. Foster, et al.
[16] links grids to virtual organizations. Grid core technologies are treated in [18,41]. The OGSA
standards are specified in [5]. The Globus Project was reported in [1,15,17]. Grid resouce manage-
ment systems were surveyed in [29,49]. Grid job scheduling and resource brokering can be found
in [4,25,30,44,49]. Resource discovery in grids are reported in Shen and Hwang [40] and Zhang
and Schopf [59]. The Nash Equilibrium was pioneered by Nash [35].
Grid monitoring and accounting systems can be found in [2,10]. The grid economy model was
introduced by Buyya, et al.[8]. BOINC is treated in [7], Folding@Home in [14], and SETI in [39].
Ferreira,etal.reviewedgridcomputinginresearchandeducation[13].DacenteronGridisstudiedin
[37]. TeraGrid istreated inChapter1 in[5],wheretheDataGrid[21]isalsocoveredin Chapters15
and16.Thee-Sciencegridisdiscussedin [21]andinChapter36in[5].Grid’5000wasevaluatedin
[55]. Grid performance wastreated in[32,34,55].Gridperformance prediction was reported by Wu,
et al. [55]. ChinaGrid was reported by Jin, Wu, etal. in[20,26,54]. China’s Vega grid was reported
inWang,etal.[50]andXu,etal.[57].TheCGSPwasreportedbyWu,etal.[53,56].
Trust management and grid security are treated in [3,23,34,44,51]. Condor was introduced in
[47] and in Chapter 11 of [5] for distributed computing. The Gridbus broker system was described
by Buyya, et al. [9]. The Sun Grid Engine was treated in [45]. ChinaGrid’s CGSV middleware for
grid monitoring was reported by Zheng, et al. [60]. Grid security and trust management are studied
in [30,34,42–44]. Additional coverage of grid software tools and grid OS support can be found in
[1,10,17,28,50]. Earlier work on related scalable computing systems can be found in Dongarra,
et al. [11], T aylor[46], and Xu and Hwang [22]. Various grid applications are reported in
[4,5,7,15,18,48].


===== page 494 =====
References 471
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This chapter was authored by Yongwei Wu of Tsinghua University (THU) China and KaiHwang of
UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,jointly.RajkumarBuyyaoftheUniversityofMelbournehascontrib-
utedSection7.3.4.TheauthorsappreciatethetechnicalsupportfromProfessorWeiminZhengofTHU
andDr.ZhiweiXuofChineseAcademyofSciencesduringthecourseofdevelopingthischapter.
References
[1] W. Allcock, J. Bresnahan, R. Kettimuthu, et al., The globus striped gridFTP framework and server, in:
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Conference onSupercomputing, 2005.
[2] R. Aydt, D. Gunter, W. Smith, et al., A Grid Monitoring Architecture, Global Grid Forum Performance
WorkingGroup, 2002.
[3] F. Azzedin, M. Maheswaran, A trust brokering system and its application to resource management in
public-resource grids, in: Proceedings of the 18th International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sympo-
sium (IPDPS’04), SantaFe, NM,April 26,2004, p.22a.
[4] F. Berman, R. Wolski, S. Figueira, J. Schopf, G. Shao, Application-level scheduling on distributed
heterogeneous networks, in: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing,
Pittsburgh, 1996.
[5] F. Berman, G. Fox, T. Hey (Eds.), Grid Computing: Making the Global Infrastructure a Reality, Wiley
Series inCommunications Networking andDistributed Systems, Wiley,2003.
[6] V. Berstis, Fundamentals of grid computing. IBM Publication, http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/abstracts/
redp3613.html,2011(accessed 26.04.11).
[7] BOINCstats - Boinc combined credit overview, http://www.boincstats.com/stats/project_graph.php?pr=bo,
2011(accessed 26.04.11).
[8] R.Buyya,D.Abramson,S.Venugopal,TheGridEconomy,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE,2005,pp.698–714.
[9] R. Buyya, K. Bubendorfer (Eds.), Market Oriented Grid and Utility Computing, John Wiley & Sons,
2009.
[10] A. Chervenak, et al., Giggle: a framework for constructing scalable replica location services, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2002ACM/IEEE Conference onSupercomputing, Baltimore, 16–22November 2002.
[11] Dongarra, I.Fister, G.Fox,etal.,SourcebookofParallelComputing,MorganKaufmanPublishers,2002.
[12] L. Ferreira, et al., Introduction to Grid Computing with Globus, (http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/abstracts/
sg246895.html?OPen)
[13] L. Ferreira, et al., Grid Computing in Research and Education, (http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/abstracts/
sg246649.html?OPen)
[14] Folding@Home. (http://fah-web.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/main.py?qtype=ossrats), 2011,(accessed 7.03.2011).
[15] I.Foster,C.Kasselman,Grid2:BlueprintforaNewComputingInfrastructure,MorganKaufmanPublishers,
2002.
[16] I. Foster, C. Kesselman, S. Tuecke, The anatomy of the grid: enabling scalable virtual organizations, Int.
J High. Perform. Comput.Appl. 15(3) (2001)200.
[17] I. Foster, Globus toolkit version 4: software for service-oriented systems, J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 21 (4)
(2006)513–520.
[18] L. Francesco, et al., The many faces of the integration of instruments and the grid, Int. J. Web. Grid.
Services 3 (3)(2007) 239–266.
[19] L.Gong,S.H.Sun,E.F.Watson,Performancemodelingandpredictionofnon-dedicatednetworkcomputing,
IEEE.Trans.Comput.,(2002).


===== page 495 =====
472 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
[20] G.Yuan,H.Jin,M.Li,N.Xiao,W.Li,Z.Wu,Y.Wu,GridcomputinginChina,J.Grid.Comput.2(2)(2004).
[21] W. Hoschek, J. Jaen-Martinez, A. Samar, H. Stockinger, K. Stockinger, Data management in an interna-
tional data grid project, in: Proceedings of the 1st IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Grid Computing
(Grid2000), Bangalore,India,17December 2000, pp.77–90.
[22] K.Hwang,Z. Xu,Scalable Parallel Computing,McGraw-Hill, 1998.
[23] K. Hwang, Y. Kwok, S. Song, M. Cai, Yu Chen, Y. Chen, DHT-based security infrastructure for trusted
internetandgrid computing,Int. J.Crit.Infrastructures 2 (4) (2006)412–433.
[24] M.A. Iverson, F. Ozguner, L. Potter, Statistical prediction of task execution time through analytical bench-
marking forscheduling in aheterogeneous environment,IEEE. Trans. Comput.,(1999)1374–1379.
[25] L. Jiadao, R. Yahyapour, Negotiation model supporting co-allocation for grid scheduling, in: Proceedings
ofthe 7th IEEE/ACM International Conference onGridComputing, 2006,p. 8.
[26] H. Jin, Challenges of grid computing, Advances in Web-Age Information Management. Lecture Notes in
ComputerScience,3739(2005)25–31.
[27] M. Kalantari, M. Akbari, Fault-aware grid scheduling using performance prediction by workload model-
ling,J.Supercomput. 46(1) (2008).
[28] C.Karnow, The grid:blueprint for anewcomputing infrastructure, Leonardo 32(4) (1999)331–332.
[29] K. Krauter, R. Buyya, M. Maheswaran, A taxonomy and survey of grid resource management systems for
distributed computing,Softw.Pract. Exper.32(2)(2002) 135–164.
[30] R.Kwok,K.Hwang,S.Song,Selfishgrids:game-theoreticmodelingandNAS/PSAbenchmarkevaluation,
IEEETrans.Parallel.Distrib.Syst.,(May)(2007).
[31] M.Li,M. Baker,TheGrid: CoreTechnologies,Wiley, 2005,(http://coregridtechnologies.org/).
[32] H.Li,Performanceevaluationingridcomputing:amodelingandpredictionperspective,in:SeventhIEEE
International SymposiumonCluster Computing andThe Grid, (CCGrid 2007),May2007, pp.869–874.
[33] X. Lijuan, Z. Yanmin, L.M. Ni, Z. Xu, GridIS: an incentive-based grid scheduling, in: Proceedings of the
19thIEEE Int’lParallel andDistributed Processing Symposium,4–8 April 2005.
[34] C. Lin, V. Varadharajan, Y. Wang, V. Pruthi. Enhancing grid security with trust management, in: Proc. of
the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing, Washington, DC, 14 September 2004,
pp.303–310.
[35] J.Nash,Non-Cooperative Games, Ann.Math. SecondSeries 54(2) (1951)286–295.
[36] P.Plaszczak,R. Wellner, GridComputing: TheSavvy Manager’sGuide, Kaufmann, 2006.
[37] M.Poess,N.Raghunath,Larege-scaledatawarehousesongrid,http://www.vldb2005.org/program/papertue/
p1055-poess.pdf,2005.
[38] J. Schopf, F. Berman, Performance prediction in production environments, in: 12th International Parallel
ProcessingSymposium,Orlando,FL, April 1998,pp. 647–653.
[39] SETI@Home credir overview, (http://www.boincstats.com/stats/project_graph.php?pr=sah), (accessed
21.04.11).
[40] H. Shen, K. Hwang, Locality-preserving clustering and discovery of resources in wide-area computational
grids,IEEE. Trans. Comput.(accepted to appear2011).
[41] R. Smith, Grid computing: a brief technology analysis, CTO Network Library. (http://www.ctonet.org/
documents/GridComputing_analysis.pdf
[42] S. Song, K. Hwang, R. Zhou, Y.K. Kwok, Trusted P2P transactions with fuzzy reputation aggregation,
IEEE. Internet.Comput. (November–December) (2005)18–28.
[43] S. Song, K. Hwang, Y.K. Kwok, Trusted grid computing with security binding and trust integration,
J.Grid. Comput.3 (1–2) (2005).
[44] S. Song, K.Hwang, Y. Kwok, Risk-tolerant heuristics and genetic algorithms for security-assured grid job
scheduling,IEEE. Trans. Comput.,(2006)703–719.
[45] Sun Microsystems, How Sun Grid Engine, enterprise edition works. White paper, www.sun.com/sofware/
gridware/sgeee53/wp-sgeee.pdf, 2001.


===== page 496 =====
Homework Problems 473
[46] I. Taylor, FromP2Pto WebServicesandGrids, Springer-Verlag, London,2005.
[47] D. Thain, T. Tannenbaum, M. Livny, Distributed computing in practice: the condor experience, Concur-
rency. Comput. Pract.Exp., (2005)323–356.
[48] S. Venugopal, R. Buyya,K.Ramamohanarao, Ataxonomy of data grids for distributed data sharing,man-
agement, andprocessing. ACM.Comput.Surv. 38(1) (2006)1–53.
[49] S. Venugopal, R. Buyya, L. Winton, A grid service broker for scheduling e-science applications on global
data grids,Concurrency. Comput. Pract.Exp.18(6) (2006)685–699.
[50] H.Wang,Z.Xu,Y.Gong,W.Li,Agora:gridcommunityinVegagrid,in:Proceedingsofthe2ndInternational
WorkshoponGridandCooperativeComputing,Shanghai,China,7December,2003,pp.685–691.
[51] V. Welch, et al., Security for grid services, in: Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International Symposium on
High Performance Distributed Computing,June22–24, 2003,pp. 48–57.
[52] Wikipedia, GridComputing. http://een.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grid_computing,(accessed 26.04.11).
[53] Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Yu, C. Hu, CGSP: an extensible and reconfigurable grid framework, Lect. Notes.
Comput. Sci.3756(2005)292–300.
[54] Y.Wu, C.Hu,L. Zha,S. Wu,Grid middlewarein China, Int.J.Web. Grid. Serv.3 (4) (2007)371–402.
[55] Y. Wu, K. Hwang, Y. Yuan, W. Zheng, Adaptive workload prediction of grid performance in confidence
windows, IEEETrans. Parallel. Distrib.Syst., (July) (2010).
[56] Y.W. Wu, S. Wu, H.S. Yu, C.M. Hu, Introduction to ChinaGrid support platform, in: Proceedings of
Parallel andDistributed Processing andApplications, 2005,pp.232–240.
[57] Z. Xu, W. Li, L. Zha, H. Yu, D. Liu, Vega: a computer systems approach to grid computing, J. Grid.
Comput. 2 (2) (2004)109–120.
[58] L. Yang, I. Foster, J.M. Schopf, Homeostatic and tendency-based CPU load predictions, in: International
Parallel andDistributed Processing Symposium,2003, pp.42–50.
[59] X. Zhang, J. Schopf, Performance analysis of the globus toolkit monitoring and discovery service, MDS2,
in: Proceedingsof the Int’l WorkshoponMiddlewarePerformance, 2004,pp. 843–849.
[60] W.Zheng,L.Liu,M.Hu,Y.Wu,L.Li,F.He,J.Tie,CGSV:anadaptablestream-integratedgridmonitor-
ingsystem,Network.Parallel.Comput.3779(2005)22–31.LectureNotesinComputerScience,Springer.
HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Problem 7.1
Consider the following list of resources allocation, code files, data transfers, and computation tasks
performed in typical grid experiments. You are asked to execute a typical job on a computational
grid that is available to you. Discuss the resource items that are controlled by the grid resource
management system on your platform. Either the Globus GT4 or the CGSP are candidate systems
to use.
a. Starting, monitoring, and controlling the execution of the resultant processes
b. Putting and getting files
c. Relevant load information: current load and queue state
d. Resources allocated to network transfers
e. Resources with advance reservation
f. Network characteristics and load
g. Relevant load information: available space and bandwidth utilization
h. Versioned source and object codes


===== page 497 =====
474 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Problem 7.2
Briefly specify the functionality of the software modules GRAM, Nexus, GSI, MDS, and GASS
implemented in the Globus GT-4 middleware library. Try to illustrate an example application in
using each of the five functional modules.
Problem 7.3
Circle only one correct answer in the following question related to the use of GT4 or CGSP middle-
ware tools for grid computing. Justify why you chose your answer. Repeat the question for those
features that are not supported by CGSP.
a. Grid workflow with WSRF support
b. JSDL job submission and legacy job execution using General Running Service
c. Heterogeneous integration using virtual database and virtual table.
d. Multi-Local Scheduler support including PBS, LSF, and Condor
Problem 7.4
Four steps are required to verify proxy credentials of two parties (Bob and Alice) in Figure 7.30.
Extend the trust deletion scheme to three parties (say adding John). Draw a diagram similar to
Figure 7.30 to show all the credentail checking operations in a e GT4-enable grid.
Problem 7.5
In Example 7.11, you have learned the basic concept of a game-theoretic approach to solving the
grid selfishness problem. Now, you are asked to the original paper by Kwok, Hwang, and Song
[30] in details on the game theory and NAS verification experiments. Discuss the advantage of the
game-theoretical solution and its implementation requirements in a real-life grid environment.
Problem 7.6
Compare three perfoirmance prediction methods: AR(p), H-Model, and AH-Model presented in
Section 7.5.2. Discuss their relative merits and limitations in grid workload characterization and per-
formance prediction. Comment on the advantage use of Savitzky-Golay filter and Kalman filter in
the prediction nprocess.
Problem 7.7
Study the Gridbus broker system in Section 7.3.4. Try to use the system to schedule an application
job with many tasks on an available grid or cloud platform. Report on the experimental settings and
performance results obtained. Discuss the strength and weakness of the Gridbus system.
Problem 7.8
Visit the BOINC web site: http://boinc@berkeley.edu and register your desktop or personal compu-
ter as a contributor machine. Join one of the listed grid application projects to gain some concrete
experience in volunteer computing. Report on your research findings and discuss the experimental
results obtained. Comment on the advantages of using a virtual grid platform against traditional
HPC systems and identify the shortcomings or limitations encountered.


===== page 498 =====
Homework Problems 475
Problem 7.9
Match the seven abbreviated terms and system models on the left with the best-match descriptions
on the right. Just enter the description label (a, b, c, …, g) in the underlined blanks in front of the
specific terms. This is a one-to-one correspondence mapping.
_____OGSA (a)Awebservicethatprovidesasetofwell-definedinterfaces
_____OGSI (b)Agloballyuniqueresourceidentifierthatdistinguishesaspecificgridservice
instancefromallothergridserviceinstances,butcarriesnoprotocol-or
instance-specificinformationsuchasnetworkaddressorsupportedprotocol
bindings
_____WSRF (c)Atruecommunitystandardbuiltbasedontwobasictechnologies,Globus
Toolkitandwebservices,thatsupports,viastandardinterfacesand
conventions,thecreation,termination,management,andinvocationof
stateful,transientservicesasnamed,managedentitieswithadynamic,
managedlifetime
______GridService (d)Asingleabstractionforagridserviceinstancethatencapsulatesallthe
instance-specificinformationrequiredtointeractwithaspecificservice
instance,andcanchangeoverthatservice’slifetime
_____GSH (e)Thefirstimplementationspecificationofaservice-orientedgrid,whichdefines
asetofconventionsandextensionsontheuseofWebServicesDescription
Language(WSDL)andXMLSchematoenablestatefulwebservices
_____GSR (f) Thecompositionofawebserviceandastatefulresourcethatis(i)expressed
asanassociationofanXMLdocumentwithdefinedtypewithawebservices
portType,and(ii)isaddressedandaccessedaccordingtotheimplied
resourcepattern,aconventionaluseofWS-Addressingendpointreferences
_____WS-Esource (g)Afamilyofwebservicespecificationsandconventionsdesignedto
standardizerepresentationof,andaccessto,statefulresourcesina
distributedenvironment
Problem 7.10
Study the grid systems: EGEE, Grid’500, DataGrid, and ChinaGrid in the examples in Section 7.2.
Choose one example system to dig deeper by finding more details from its Web site and published
papers. Conduct an original research on its updated system development. Identify some open pro-
blems discovered and report on your research findings.
Problem 7.11
This problem requires you to run a distributed program (MPI code) on any GT$-enable grid
platform that you have access to or you can set up with a research team. Write a report to explain
the grid experimental setting using the Globus tools. Report the lessons learned and performance
results obtained.
Problem 7.12
DescribehowmutualauthenticationisimplementedbetweentwouserpartiesAandBinFigure7.35
across a grid using the Globus Grid Security Infrastructure and PKI. You need to describe five


===== page 499 =====
476 CHAPTER 7 Grid Computing Systems and Resource Management
Step 1 Step 2
Step 4 Step 5 CA
A B
X.509
certificate
Step 3
FIGURE 7.35
MutualauthenticationbetweentwopartiesusingtheGSIandX.509certificateissuedfromthecertificate
authority(CA).
Table 7.10 ComparisonamongP2P Networks, Grids,andP2P Grids
Features P2PNetworks GridSystems P2PGrids
Applicationsandpeer Distributedfilesharing,
ornoderoles contentdistribution,
peersactingasclients
andservers
Systemcontroland Policy-basedcontrolin
servicemodel aP2Pgrid,allservices
fromclientmachines
Systemconnectivity Staticconectionswith
high-speeklinksover
gridresources
Resourcediscoveryand Autonomouspeers
jobmanagement withoutdiscovery,no
centraljobscheduler
Representativesystems NSFTeraGrid,UK
EGGEGrid,ChinaGrid
handshaking steps for how B verifies the identity of A. Assume that a trusted certificate authority
(CA)isavailabletoissueX.509certificatescontainingtheneededpublic keystoanygrid user.Each
usercanapplyhisprivatekeytoencryptamessage.Thereceivingendcanapplythesender’spublic
key to decrypt the message. User A can verify the identity of B in the exact same operation, except
reversingtheroles.Youdonotneedtorepeatthatreversedprocess.
Problem 7.13
Distinguish P2P networks from grids and P2P grids by filling in the missing entries in Table 7.10.
Some entries are already given. You may want to review material in Table 1.3, Table 1.5, and
Table 1.9. More material on P2P and P2P grid systems can be found in Chapter 8.


===== page 500 =====
Homework Problems 477
Problem 7.14
This is a survey report about all the P2P grids or volunteer computing grids that can manage to join
as contributing hosts. Compare the relative performance of all the volunteer grids you have used.
Discuss their strengths and weakness in hardware capabilities, software support, and middleware
services provided.
Problem 7.15
Try to virtualize some of the resources in Problems 7.8, 7.13, or 7.14. Repeat one the the three pro-
blemsin using virtual machines. Discuss thegains and losses in using a virtualized production grid.
YoucanalsousetheEC2orothervirtualizeddatacenterstoconducttheneededexperiments.


===== page 501 =====  [ocr]
This page intentionally left blank


===== page 502 =====
CHAPTER
8
Peer-to-Peer Computing and
Overlay Networks
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Summary...........................................................................................480
8.1 Peer-to-PeerComputing Systems................................................................480
8.1.1 BasicConceptsof P2P ComputingSystems..........................................480
8.1.2 FundamentalChallenges in P2PComputing.........................................486
8.1.3 Taxonomyof P2PNetwork Systems.................................................490
8.2 P2POverlayNetworks andProperties............................................................492
8.2.1 Unstructured P2POverlay Networks.................................................492
8.2.2 Distributed Hash Tables(DHTs).....................................................496
8.2.3 StructuredP2P OverlayNetworks...................................................498
8.2.4 Hierarchically StructuredOverlay Networks..........................................501
8.3 Routing,Proximity, andFaultTolerance..........................................................505
8.3.1 Routing in P2POverlayNetworks...................................................505
8.3.2 Network Proximity inP2P Overlays..................................................507
8.3.3 FaultTolerance andFailureRecovery................................................509
8.3.4 ChurnResilienceagainst Failures...................................................512
8.4 Trust,Reputation, andSecurity Management.....................................................514
8.4.1 PeerTrust andReputation Systems.................................................514
8.4.2 Trust OverlayandDHT Implementation..............................................517
8.4.3 PowerTrust:A ScalableReputation System..........................................520
8.4.4 Securing Overlays toPrevent DDoS Attacks..........................................522
8.5 P2PFile SharingandCopyright Protection.......................................................523
8.5.1 FastSearch, Replica, andConsistency..............................................524
8.5.2 P2PContentDelivery Networks.....................................................529
8.5.3 Copyright Protection Issues andSolutions...........................................533
8.5.4 CollusivePiracy Prevention in P2PNetworks.........................................535
8.6 BibliographicNotes andHomeworkProblems....................................................538
Acknowledgements.................................................................................538
References.........................................................................................539
Homework Problems................................................................................541
DistributedandCloudComputing 479
©2012Elsevier,Inc.Allrightsreserved.


===== page 503 =====
480 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we study peer-to-peer (P2P) networks and their applications. P2P overlay networks
are built over a large number of client computers through virtual networking over the Internet. We
present unstructured, structured, and hybrid overlay networks. Distributed hash tables (DHTs) are
studied for fast routing and locality preservation operations. Fault tolerance and churn resilience are
studied to improve dependability. On the application side, P2P networks are used for distributed file
sharing and content distribution applications. Trust management and copyright protection are studied
with reputation systems and content poisoning techniques. Examples are given to illustrate the
design principles of P2P networks and the protocols applied in real-life applications. We will cover
P2P social networks in Chapter 9.
8.1 PEER-TO-PEER COMPUTING SYSTEMS
P2P computing systems are widely used in distributed file sharing, messaging, online chatting,
video streaming, and social networking. It has been estimated that P2P applications on the Internet
accounted for about 40 percent to 70 percent of the Internet traffic worldwide from 2008 through
2010 and the trend is increasing in light of the popularity of online applications such as Facebook,
Twitter, and YouTube. Unlike a traditional distributed system, P2P networks are autonomous and
self-organized with free participation from the peers or clients. In a P2P network, peers share com-
puting and data resources with others. All peers offer a mixture of online services on a voluntary
basis. There are economical advantages as well as legal problems in today’s P2P networks and their
open applications.
As shown in Figure 8.1, Internet traffic due to e-mail is quite flat and getting lower, compared
with other traffic components. FTP traffic has also declined over the past 15 years. The major traf-
fic surge on the Internet has really been in P2P requests and responses. Even web traffic is declin-
ing with the rise of social networking and digital content downloads. By 2007, 70 percent of
Internet traffic was attributed to P2P applications. This is our motivation for studying P2P systems
in this chapter.
8.1.1 Basic Concepts of P2P Computing Systems
Communication involving two equal role users can be treated as P2P communication; as such, it
can be said that earlier distributed systems also followed a P2P model. Basically, P2P computing is
a technique that takes advantage of computational resources (such as storage, CPU cycles, and
bandwidth) and content resources (such as content files) available at the edges of the Internet to
complete huge tasks, such as distribution of content to a large audience and distributed search
engine and CPU-bound computing tasks.
The resources at an edge network have intermittent availability, as they are added and removed
unexpectedly all the time. P2P computing eliminates the coordination by a central server, and no
peer has a global view of the entire system. Instead, peers act as both servers and clients, sharing
resources and services directly with one another. P2P networks share a number of common charac-
teristics, which are summarized in the following list.


===== page 504 =====
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1993
(cid:129) Decentralization In a pure P2P computing system, peers are equal and there is no central server
to coordinate the system. Each peer has a partial view of the whole system to construct the
overlay network, and controls its data and resources.
(cid:129) Self-organization Self-organization means no central management point is required to organize
the peer computing resources and the data resources spreading over the peers. The resources in
P2P computing systems are dynamic or fluctuate in the sense that they come and go at any
time, at will. It would be very costly to dedicate a server to manage these systems.
(cid:129) Ad hoc connectivity and dynamics The availability of peers is unpredictable. A peer may join
or leave the system at any time. The overlay topologies and the system scales will vary
enormously and rapidly. P2P computing systems should provide stable services even in extra
dynamic environments.
(cid:129) Anonymity In a decentralized P2P network, peers resort to detour paths to send/receive requests
(i.e., two nodes communicate through some middle nodes). This ensures senders’ anonymity.
Anonymity can be also achieved through hashing.
(cid:129) Scalability TheP2Pmodeleliminatesthesinglepointoffailureproblemrelatedtothetraditional
centralizedclient/servermodel.Eachpeeronlymaintainsalimitednumberofsystemstatesandshares
resourcesdirectlywithothers.ThesefeaturesenablethehighscalabilityofP2Pcomputingsystems.
(cid:129) Fault tolerance In a P2P network, all peers are created equal and no peer can dominate the
system or become a single point of failure to pull down the entire system. Resources could be
stored in multiple peers. These features facilitate fault tolerance.
ciffart
tenretnI
fo
egatnecreP
8.1 Peer-to-Peer Computing Systems 481
Email
FTP
P2P
Web
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Year
FIGURE8.1
ThedistributionofInternettrafficbasedonapplicationtrends.
(CourtesyofCacheLogicResearch,2007)


===== page 505 =====
482 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
8.1.1.1 Distinction between Client/Server and P2P Architectures
The traditional client/server architecture is formed with many client hosts surrounding a server node;
see Figure 8.2(a). A P2P computing system is formed with peer hosts that are fully distributed with-
out using a centralized server; see Figure 8.2(b). In other words, the client/server architecture is
server-oriented. The server splits a task into many parts and dispatches the parts to the clients. The
clients complete the task assigned to them independently and seldom communicate with one
another. The clients require resources from the server and the server delivers the required resources
to the clients. On the contrary, in a P2P network, participating clients (peers) all play equal roles.
They exchange resources with one another directly. Peers are autonomous, self-organizing, and thus
less structured, less secure, and less controllable than those of client/server systems.
8.1.1.2 Three P2P Network Models
Servers are also used in P2P networks, but they have a different role. Napster, a representative P2P
file-sharing service, uses an index server to manage all file links shared by all peers. Figure 8.3(a)
shows the Napster model. Peers register shared data information on the index server. The address
informationoffileownersisgiventotherequesterfromtheindexserver.Thenthefileistransferred
between the requester and the owners directly. The Gnutella 0.4 file-sharing system adopts a pure
P2Pmodel,whichisillustratedinFigure8.3(b).Peersonlyindextheirownsharedfiles.
Server
Clients Peers
(a) Client/server architecture (b) P2P computing model
FIGURE 8.2
P2Pnetworkmodelversusclient/serverarchitecture.
Data
Control Control Data
Super peer
Data
Index
Control
server
(a) Centralized model (Napster) (b) Pure P2P model (Gnutella 0.4) (c) Hierarchical model (KaZaA)
FIGURE 8.3
EvolutionofP2PnetworksystemsfromcentralizedNapstertoflatGnutellaandhierarchicallystructured
KaZaAusingsupernodes.


===== page 506 =====
8.1 Peer-to-Peer Computing Systems 483
Since there is no central index server, file request messages are flooded to their neighbor peers.
Gnutella 0.6 systems, KaZaA, and Skype leverage the third model, the hierarchical model; see
Figure 8.3(c). A portion of powerful peers are selected as super nodes in the system. The requests
are only flooded among powerful peers, hence increasing scalability. P2P distributed computing sys-
tems always maintain central servers for task management and communication to client peers. How-
ever, client peers do not need to communicate. Therefore, peers in this context refer to computing
systems that make their resources available. P2P platforms act as a middleware foundation to enable
easy development of P2P systems. The platforms provide security services, communication services,
and standard services (indexing, searching, and file sharing).
8.1.1.3 P2P Applications
P2P networks are widely used in Internet applications. Table 8.1 lists some typical P2P applications
and examples. File sharing is the most popular P2P application. P2P content networks deliver data
objects to all audiences. However, unlike client/server networks, the system uses peer resources to
distribute content. Peers locate users and relay the messages directly.
Example 8.1 The Skype Network for Online Video Telephony
Skype is a popular P2P Voice over IP (VoIP) service which attracts more than 500 million registered users
and more than 40 million active users daily. Skype leverages P2P techniques for user profile storage, user
search, media transfer, and NAT traversal. It also supports instant messaging and file transfers. Instead of
the standard Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), Skype usesa proprietary VoIP network. Figure 8.4 shows the
P2Parchitecture of the Skypeonline VoIPsystem.
SkypeappliesthehybridP2Pmodel,similartoKaZaA.Infact,thesetwosystemsaredevelopedbythe
samedesigngroup.AnynodewithapublicIPaddressandhavingsufficientCPU,memory,andnetwork
bandwidthisacandidatetobeasupernode.However,userscannotmanuallycontrolwhetheritisasuper
nodeorordinaryhost.Anordinaryhostconnectstoasupernode,inordertojointhesystemforVoIPservices.
Table 8.1 TypicalP2P Applications andExample Network Systems
P2PApplication ExamplesofP2P
Area BriefDescription Networks
Filesharing Queriesareforwardedbypeerscollaboratively.File Napster,Gnutella,
objectsaretransferreddirectlybetweenpeers. KaZaA,eDonkey
Contentdistribution Nodesforwardthecontenttheyhavereceivedto BitTorrent,PPlive
otherpeersuntilallnodesreceivethecontent.
P2Pinstantmessaging Textmessagesorvideoandaudiodataarerelayedby Skype,MSN
peersinthesystems,insteadofcentralservers.
Distributedcomputing Computationallyintensivetasksaresplitintosubtasks. SETI@Home,
Nodesprocesssubtasksindependently. Folding@Home
Collaborationsupport Eventsandmessagesexchangedarerelayedinstantly Groove,Magi,AIM
toallotherpeermembersinthegroup.
Platforms Platformsaregeneralframeworksthatprovidesupport JXTA,Microsoft.NET
forP2PcomputingoruseP2Pmechanisms.


===== page 507 =====
484 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Msg exchange
during login
Super node
Ordinary host
Login server
FIGURE 8.4
TheSkypearchitectureanditsmajorcomponents.
A super node or ordinary host is also called a Skype client. Each client maintains a list of reachable
nodes. This list is called the host cache, and it contains the IP addresses and ports of a number of super
nodes (typically 200). A number of super nodes, which are run by the service provider, are hardcoded
into the client host cache. After the first login, a client learns other super nodes’ information to fill its
cache. The login server is the only central component in Skype. It stores usernames and passwords for
user authentication. During its login process, a client first chooses a valid entry from its cache to build a
TCP connection. If there is no valid entry in the cache, the client will report a login failure. The client then
contactsthe login serverfor authentication.
Aclientdetects whether itisbehind the networkaddress translator(NAT)/firewall ornot duringitslogin
process. Online and offline user information is stored and propagated in a decentralized fashion, and so
are user search queries. Users’ buddy lists are stored locally on the Skype clients. Skype claims it uses an
advanced Globe Index technique for quick user search. However, it is unclear how it works since all the
communications, including both control messages and media data, are encrypted. Skype clients prefer to
use TCP for call signaling and UDP for media transfers. However, if it is impossible to communicate
through UDP due to a NAT/firewall, TCP connections are used. In the case that the caller or callee is
behind a NAT/firewall, a valid node which has a publicly accessible IP address is used for signaling and
media datarelay. Therelay nodesmaychange duringconservations.


===== page 508 =====
8.1 Peer-to-Peer Computing Systems 485
Example 8.2 The SETI@Home Project for Distributed Supercomputing
SETI is an acronym for Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence. The goal of SETI is to analyze radio
signals from the outer space for detecting intelligent life outside Earth. The analysis work is a computa-
tionally intensive task and requires Tflops/second (Tera-floating-point operations per second) proces-
sing power. The SETI@Home project aims to leverage the available CPU cycles at the edge of the
Internet. The project was released by the Space Sciences Laboratory at the University of California,
Berkeley in May 1999. SETI@Home has logged more than 5.2 million participants worldwide and has
been considered the largest distributed computing project. Figure 8.5 illustrates the workload distribu-
tion process.
SETI@Home shares SERENDIP’s (Search for Extraterrestrial Radio Emissions from Nearby Developed
Intelligent Populations) data source, which was recorded on removable tapes and mailed to the laboratory
at UCB. SERENDIP collects signal data sources from outer space at Arecibo using a telescope. The data
sources are divided into small work units which are formed by dividing the 2.5 MHz signal into 256 fre-
quency bands, each about 10 KHz wide. These work units are stored on the servers and are sent to parti-
cipant computers. The programs on client sites analyze the work units during idle cycles. Finally, the
results are reportedbackto the servers.
Users who would like to donate their computing resources download BOINC (Berkeley Open Infra-
structure for Network Computing), which is a software that enables users to donate their idle computer
time to science projects like SETI@Home. BOINC automatically downloads work units and manages analy-
sis progress. The screensavers on users’ computers display some analysis information when users are not
using their computers. SETI@Home uses the concept of P2P in the sense that it takes advantage of avail-
able computing resources at the edge of the Internet. However, users’ computers do not communicate
directly.
S plit Tapes Get
R
w
e
o
p
r
o
k
r
u
t
n
re
it
s
s
ults co
U
m
se
p
r
u
’s
ter
Get work units
Report results Laptop User’s
W s o to rk r a u g n e its Dat s a e / r r v e e s r ults Rep G
or
e
t
t
r e
w
s
o
u
r
l
k
ts
units (w c
U
o o
s
m r
e
ld p
r’
w u
s
i t d e e r )
computer
FIGURE8.5
WorkloaddistributionprocessinSETI@Homeforvolunteercomputing.


===== page 509 =====
486 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
8.1.2 Fundamental Challenges in P2P Computing
A P2P computing system eliminates the need for a central coordination point. This makes the sys-
tem more scalable and flexible. In this section, we introduce 11 fundamental technical challenges in
designing and using a P2P network in real-life applications. Solutions to these issues will be studied
in subsequent sections.
8.1.2.1 Heterogeneity in Peer Resources
Basically, P2P computing faces three sources of heterogeneity problems: namely hardware, soft-
ware, and network requirements. Peers offer many different hardware hosts and platform architec-
tures. Incompatibility does exist between the software and the OS at different hosts. Different
network connections and protocols make it even more complex to apply in some real-life applica-
tions. A P2P computing system aggregates diverse resources at the peer nodes. The system should
be designed to handle node heterogeneity transparently.
8.1.2.2 Scalability for Future Growth
This is a fundamental goal of P2P computing systems. The system is able to support web-scale
computers from hundreds to millions, and as the system size grows, the efficiency should not be
affected negatively, or should just degrade gracefully. System scaling is directly related to perfor-
mance and bandwidth. For example, a decentralized P2P file-sharing system uses message forward-
ing for information searching. If the forwarding path length grows linearly with the system size, the
system cannot be scaled to a larger size.
With flooding, the messages consume a considerable network bandwidth. Gnutella version 0.4
took flooding as a query forwarding scheme, and hence was not scalable. Gnutella version 0.6 and
KaZaA leverage some powerful and stable nodes as super peers. Each peer is either a super peer or
assigned to a super peer. Queries are only flooded among super peers, which saves bandwidth con-
sumption. The super-node model is more scalable in this sense.
8.1.2.3 Effective Search of Desired Peers
Data resources spread over the peer nodes in P2P systems. To use or to access a data object, a data
locating operation (or search operation) among the peer nodes is performed first. Apparently, the
data location is important in terms of affecting collective performance. However, there is no central
index server for the shared resources, and each peer only has a partial view of the whole system. It
is difficult to find the right peers for queries. The design of efficient data location algorithms is a
unique challenge in P2P systems.
Search can be classified into two categories: blind searches and informed searches. In a blind
search, peers only have the indices of their own data. When receiving a query, a peer forwards it
to either all its neighbors or a subset of its neighbors without considering from which path it can
receive the query response. In an informed search, peers maintain indices of the data residing on
other peers. For example, a peer keeps track of the data indices of the peers that r hops away
from it. Peers forward queries to the neighbors that can respond with high probability. The
design challenge in a blind search is to find the right peers quickly with low-bandwidth con-
sumption, while the challenge in an informed search is to track peers’ data indices with low con-
trol overhead.


===== page 510 =====
8.1 Peer-to-Peer Computing Systems 487
8.1.2.4 Data Locality and Network Proximity
These are two design objectives in modern P2P applications. Data locality means data with similar
attribute values is kept on close peers. It is an efficient way to support complex query operations
and enable fast data location. Network proximity is measured by the closeness of two peers in the
underlying physical IP network. By taking network proximity into account, one can build a P2P
overlay network in such a way that physically close peers are connected with one another. Thus,
query messages or data items are likely to be exchanged among physically close peers, which not
only improves Quality of Service (QoS) but also saves network bandwidth. Figure 8.6 illustrates the
advantage of network proximity awareness.
Figure 6.5(c) shows a part of the IP network. C1 and C3 belong to one autonomous system
(AS), while C2 and C4 belong to another. If the nodes form an overlay as shown in Figure 8.6(a),
a message from C3 to C1 would traverse the link between two ASes two times. This prolongs the
message delivery delay and consumes unnecessary backbone network bandwidth between AS1 and
AS2. If network proximity is considered and a proximity-aware overlay is built as in Figure 8.6(b),
the message would not transfer the link between two autonomous systems. It is a challenge to find
physically close nodes in a decentralized P2P overlay with a central server and no node has the glo-
bal knowledge.
8.1.2.5 Routing Efficiency
As in IP network, routing routines are demanded in forwarding a message to its destination. They
directly affect the performance of P2P systems. A pure P2P system avoids single points of fail-
ure. However, it still faces failures related to disconnections and unreachability, partitions, and
peer node failures. The system should run properly even if there are failures, and it should repair
failures in an ad hoc way. Replication is an efficient way to improve system availability and
fault tolerance. Maintaining the consistency of replicas in a distributed system is always a big
challenge.
C1 C2 C1 C2
C3 C4 C3 C4
(a) Inefficient overlay (b) Proximity-aware overlay
C1 C3 C2 C4
AS1 AS2
(c) Underlying IP topology
FIGURE8.6
Buildingaproximity-awareP2Poverlaynetwork.


===== page 511 =====
488 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
8.1.2.6 Free-Riding Avoidance
Another challenge in P2P computing systems is the free-riding problem. P2P computing systems
aggregate resources at the edge of the Internet to improve performance. The participant peers may
be selfish and unwilling to contribute anything. These peers are called free riders. The free-riding
problem is common in systems that rely on voluntary contributions from individuals since people
are not willing to pay the cost of public goods when they hope someone else will bear the cost
instead. Thus, incentive mechanisms to encourage contributions from individual peers are required.
The incentive mechanism should evaluate peers’ contributions correctly and give awards to the con-
tributors, while maintaining anonymity and defending malicious attacks.
8.1.2.7 Anonymity and Privacy
Peers in P2P systems like to hide their information from others. Anonymity should be an option to
peers, especially for peers in P2P communication systems. There are three levels of anonymity:
namely initiator anonymity, responder anonymity, and mutual anonymity. The first two levels of
anonymity can be further seen as directional anonymity, while the third level can be seen as bidirec-
tional anonymity. Basically, directional anonymity can be implemented using onion routing.
Example 8.3 Onion Routing to Protect Anonymity of Peer Machines
In onion routing, the initiator knows everything. However, intermediate routers does not. Onion routing is
used to hide the identify of the originator of the final destination. This is done by encryption of the incom-
ing message and the next hop information recursively using public keys. It creates a number of layers for
the message. Each layer contains the information of the next hop nodes (called onion routers). Each onion
router removes one layer and forwards the remaining message to the next hop onion router. This way, any
node knows onlyits immediatesender andwho isthe nextreceiver.
Figure 8.7 shows an example of onion routing. The message is sent from A to B. The identity of A is
hidden from C,D, and A, while the message itself is hidden from C and D. Onion routing can beimproved
using encryption with symmetric keys. Mutual anonymity requires hiding both the initiator and responder’s
identities, and no others are able to guess the two parties. Encrypting messages and building agents for
peers are possible ways to implement mutual anonymity. However, these techniques bring high overhead
and conflict with some design goals of P2P systems. For example, using encryption incurs cryptography
cost, while usingagentconflicts with decentralization.
C to D
D to A D to A
B msg B msg B msg
A C D B
FIGURE 8.7
Anexampleofonionroutingforanonymouscommunication.


===== page 512 =====
8.1 Peer-to-Peer Computing Systems 489
8.1.2.8 Trust and Reputation Management
Lack of trust among peers poses another problem. Peers are strangers to one another, and inevitably
some of them act evilly or in an uncooperative way. It is required in P2P systems to provide a trust-
worthy environment in which peers’ trust is measurable and malicious peers are punishable. How-
ever, P2P systems are fully distributed. Transactions are performed directly between peers. No
central server keeps track of the transactions. Hence, building a trustworthy P2P environment is a
unique challenge.
8.1.2.9 Network Threats and Defense against Attacks
Due to the decentralization and ad hoc characteristics, attacks in P2P systems can be easily per-
formed. Denial of service (DoS) and distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks are possible by
flooding messages to particular peers and claiming that the victim has all files requested. QoS
attacks can be implemented by serving files slowly or sending different files to requesters. The
anonymity design of P2P systems helps malicious peers easily hide behind others.
Example 8.4 Defense against DDoS Attacks
Figure 8.8 shows a DDoS attack by two malicious nodes through flooding queries throughout the entire
network. The malicious peers flood one or more network nodes with unwanted queries or messages so
that their communication buffers get overflowed, and thus TCP connections get denied. The flooded node
is saturated by these messages and is unable to handle more queries from good peers. A well-designed
P2P network should be able to handle this type of flooding attack to any node in the system. Sometimes
the attack could be initiated from outside the P2P network and use some of the peer nodes simply as
zombies.
8.1.2.10 Churn Resilience
The peers in P2P computing systems are from clients at the edge of the Internet. They come, leave,
and even fail at random. Faulty nodes no longer forward messages. In some cases, failure of a node
would cause others to disconnect from the whole system or lose index information. For example, in
KaZaA, if a super node fails, the nodes assigned to it would lose connections to the system and
500
500 Malicious peer
500 500
1,000 “Good” peer
3,500
500 500 500 500 queries/minute
500 500 1,000
FIGURE8.8
AnexampleofaDDoSattackinasmallP2Pnetworkthroughmessageflooding.


===== page 513 =====
490 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
have to find other super nodes to connect with. The index information kept in the faulty super node
would be lost. Node failure imposes a great challenge to achieve fault tolerance in P2P networks.
Since there is no central coordinator, peers use periodic heartbeat messages to check the status and
availability of other peers.
8.1.2.11 Collusive Piracy Prevention
Online piracy has hindered the legal and commercial use of P2P file sharing. The illegal file con-
tents are from the peers that have the legal contents and spread them to the pirates. This is called
collusion. An agent recruits clients to send illegal download requests to suspected peers. For each
request, if the suspected peer returns a clean copy, the feedback is 1. Otherwise, the feedback is −1.
If the sum of feedbacks exceeds a predefined threshold, the suspected peer is recognized as a
colluder.
Collusive piracy is the main source of intellectual property violations within the boundary of a
P2P network. Paid clients (colluders) may illegally share copyrighted content files with unpaid cli-
ents (pirates). Such online piracy has hindered the use of open P2P networks for commercial con-
tent delivery. Lou and Hwang [32] have developed a proactive content poisoning scheme to stop
colluders and pirates from alleged copyright infringements in P2P file sharing. The basic idea is to
detect pirates in a timely manner with identity-based signatures and timestamped tokens. This
scheme stops collusive piracy without hurting legitimate P2P clients by targeting poisoning on
detected violators exclusively.
8.1.3 Taxonomy of P2P Network Systems
This section classifies the existing or proposed P2P networks by their structures and functionality.
P2P network systems are identified by their names or by a short description in Figure 8.8. Some of
the well-known networks will be treated in more detail in examples in subsequent sections.
8.1.3.1 Unstructured P2P Overlays
The neighborhood relationships in an unstructured P2P overlay network are randomly connected
without much constraint. Unstructured overlays are easy to build up or down when user anonymity
andminimaladministrativeoverheadaredesired.Atthetimeofthiswriting,manyP2Pnetworkscan
be started with no structural constraints. Well-known examples include Napster, Gnutella, KaZaA,
Skype,BitTorrent,andeMule.HerearesomeinterestingfeaturesinanunstructuredP2Poverlay:
(cid:129) Data is distributed randomly over peers.
(cid:129) The overlay can start with centralized control and gradually shifted to fully decentralized control.
(cid:129) There are no broadcasting mechanisms (or if there are, they are constrained).
(cid:129) Flooding queries to entire network may generate heavy network traffic.
(cid:129) There is no guarantee of a deterministic search result.
(cid:129) The TTL (time to live) limit on a query message may reach the entire network.
8.1.3.2 Structured P2P Overlays
In a structured P2P overlay network, peer nodes are organized into predefined and restrictive struc-
tures,suchasaring,achord,oratreetobecharacterizedinSection8.2.Goodexamplesofstructured
overlays include Chord, CAN, Pastry, and Tapestry. Many P2P networks may start with a random


===== page 514 =====
8.1 Peer-to-Peer Computing Systems 491
structure,butlateradoptamore efficientoverlaystructuretospeedupsearchesanddownloadswith
enhancedsecurityandefficiency.Herearesomeusefulfeaturesofstructuredoverlays:
(cid:129) Structured routing mechanisms in the overlay
(cid:129) Add application-level overlays over the peers
(cid:129) Reduce routing hops, compared with using random graphs
(cid:129) Avoid flooding and eliminate hotspots
(cid:129) Guarantee the search results
(cid:129) Provide load balancing among the peer nodes
(cid:129) Provide enhanced scalability and fault tolerance
(cid:129) Preserve data locality if desired
(cid:129) Promote self-organization under constraints
(cid:129) Provide enhanced security protection
(cid:129) Support node heterogeneity
8.1.3.3 Taxonomy by Structure and Functionality
Figure 8.9 maps existing P2P systems according to their design style and functionality. The bottom
row denotes centralized systems built in the earlier years. The middle row covers unstructured P2P
systems that are decentralized, like Gnutella, FastTrack, and DirectConnect. The upper row is for
decentralized and structured P2P systems. At the lower-left corner is Napster, which is centralized
and unstructured. At the upper-right corner are P2P resource managers, P2P directory services, and
P2P databases that are all decentralized using structured overlays are expected.
Design style
CAN P2P database?
Decentralized chord
P2P directory service?
& structured pastry
P2P resource management?
tapestry
P2P CSCW?
P2P grid computing?
Gnutella
Decentralized &
fast track
unstructured
direct connect
SETI@Home Jabber JXTA
Centralized Napster entropia groove .NET my service
avaki MSN messager
Functionality
File sharing Distributed Collaboration Platforms
computing
FIGURE8.9
ClassificationofvariousP2Psystemsbyfunctionalityandcontrolstyle.
(CourtesyofMinCai,EE657Report,UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,2007)


===== page 515 =====
492 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
CSCW refers to computer-supported cooperative work. CAN, Chord, Pastry, and Tapestry are
now all using structured overlays with decentralized control. Functionally speaking, the P2P grids
are mainly for distributed computing and collaboration applications that have no fixed structures.
SETI@Home has centralized control for distributed supercomputing applications. The rest of the
P2P networks fall in various squares in the 2D design space as shown. Note that some lattice
squares are empty or are labeled with a question mark, meaning no systems are being built yet
under that category.
8.2 P2P OVERLAY NETWORKS AND PROPERTIES
Overlay networks are built on top of physical IP networks. The nodes are end hosts from the physi-
cal networks, while the links are virtually built among nodes with TCP connections or simply poin-
ters to IP addresses. The virtual links do not need to have the same weights. Different weights can
be designed for different types of links. Since end hosts are dynamic, overlay networks require pro-
tocols for overlay maintenance. A new node contacts another node which is already on the overlay
network for bootstrapping. Nodes in overlay networks leverage periodic heartbeat messages to ver-
ify neighbor aliveness. If a current neighbor fails, a node may connect to another node according to
the maintenance protocol.
RecallthatinFigure1.16,onecanmapsomenodesfromphysicalIPnetworkstoanoverlaynet-
work built with virtual links. The mapping is shown by the vertical dashed lines between physical
hoststovirtualnodescalledpeers.Overlaynetworksdonotrequireadditionalphysicalinfrastructure;
hencetheyareeasytodeployanduse.Theoverlaytopologycanchangebasedonapplication.Node
failuresareeasilyrecoveredsincenodescanchooseotherstoconnectwith.Thereisnorestrictionon
thecommunicationprotocol.Applicationdesignerscandefineanyprotocoltheylike.Theunderlying
physical networks are transparent to the overlay designers. However, to better utilize network
resources(e.g.,networkproximity),oneshouldtakephysicalnetworksintoconsideration.
A P2P network is a type of overlay network. According to overlay graph properties, P2P net-
works are classified into two categories: namely unstructured and structured overlays. Unstructured
overlay networks are always built based on random graphs. Nodes select their neighbors randomly
from all the peers in the overlay. Structured overlay network graphs, however, have predefined
structures (e.g., ring, hypercube, etc.). Each peer has a unique identifier and can only build neigh-
borhood relationships to the peer nodes whose identifiers have satisfied the predefined requirements.
Some hybrid P2P overlay networks, which leverage the advantages of both unstructured and struc-
tured overlay networks, are also used to reach the advantages of these two types of overlay
networks.
8.2.1 Unstructured P2P Overlay Networks
To build a good unstructured P2P overlay, the node degree (i.e., the number of neighbors) of a peer
and the expected number of nodes that are traversed from one node to another should be kept as
small as possible. In addition, the join or departure operations cannot cause extensive modifications
of the graph. Finally, the overlay can determine the forwarding path easily, when some nodes fail
or depart unexpectedly.


===== page 516 =====
8.2 P2P Overlay Networks and Properties 493
8.2.1.1 Construction by Random Graphs
The Erdos-Renyi random graph [38] can be considered as a baseline model for unstructured P2P
overlay networks. The probability p that any two vertices (nodes) have an edge is equal and inde-
pendent. The probability that a vertex has a degree of k is as follows:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Pfd =kg=
n−1
pkð1−pÞn−1−k (8.1)
k
The expected degree of a vertices is Efdg=ðn−1Þp: Apparently, if p=c/n, then for a large n,
Pfd =kg= cke −c: That is how the node degree follows a Poisson distribution. For unstructured
k!
P2P systems, the Erdos-Renyi random graph is too random to design a distributed algorithm for
determination of the forwarding path from one peer to another peer.
8.2.1.2 Small-World Model
Small-world graphs [2] have two prominent properties: a short mean-shortest path length and high
cluster coefficient. For P2P systems, these two properties are important. The former one helps us to
reduce the expected hop count between peer nodes and the latter one facilitates the handling of the
flash crowd. Suppose each node has two types of neighbors, namely nearby neighbors and distant
neighbors. The nearby neighbors of a node i are the nodes whose distances are smaller than p.
Node i also has q distant neighbors that are selected randomly from the nodes that are out of this
scope. A node i builds a link to any node j, where the distance of i and j is smaller than p, that is,
dði,jÞ<p: Node i builds a link to a distant node v with probability dði,vÞ −r, where r is the cluster-
ing exponent. A search query is forwarded to the closest neighbor to final destination. The cluster-
ing exponent r affects the search time.
8.2.1.3 Scale-Free Graph
The scale-free graph model is also widely used in the context of P2P applications. The node degree
follows a power-law distribution, which means the probability that a node has a degree of k is pro-
portional to k −α , where α is a constant and always in the range (2, 3). The graph diameter (i.e., the
longest minimum distance of any two nodes) is of the order of OðlnnÞ, where n is the number of
nodes in the graph. Thus, the diameter almost remains unchanged when the graph scale grows. In
practice, many real networks are thought to be scale-free, such as social networks and the Internet
graph.
In the Gnutella 0.4 overlay network, the node degree follows a power-law distribution with α
approximately equal to 2.3 [41]. This is mainly because new join nodes are likely to build overlay
connections to the nodes already with high degrees. A scale-free network is also resilient to the ran-
dom node failures. However, if the network is attacked by knowledgeable attackers and some of the
high-degree nodes break down, the graph may be partitioned into several disjointed parts or the
graph diameter will grow quickly. Thus, to build a resilient scale-free graph based on P2P overlays,
high-degree node identities should be hidden if possible.
8.2.1.4 P2P Networks for Distributed File Sharing
The most popular applications that are built on top of unstructured P2P networks are P2P file-
sharing systems. Table 8.2 compares the P2P file-sharing systems Napster, Gnutella, and KaZaA.
These three systems represent three distinct types of P2P service models. Basically, in these


===== page 517 =====
494 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Table 8.2 P2P File-Sharing Applications UsingUnstructured OverlayNetworks
P2PNetwork Napster Gnutella KaZaA
Architecture Centralizedmodel PureP2Pmodel Hierarchicalwithsuperpeers
Fileindices Centralizedindex Eachnodekeepsfile Supernodekeepstheindices
serverskeepalllinks indicesforitselfonly forthenodesthatconnectto
them
Searchalgorithm Queriesaresentto Queriesareflooded Queriestosupernodeswith
servers,whichreturn onentireoverlay floodingamongthemselvesand
therequestedfiles Matchingpeersreply replytotheoriginators
tooriginators
Searchtime(hops) O(1) O(logn) O(logm),mcountssupernodes
Searchcost(#msgs) O(1) O(d*n),disnode O(c*m),cissupernodedegree
degree
Filefetchmethod Originatorgetsthe Queryoriginatorgets Originatorgetsthefilefrom
filefromasingle thefiledirectlyfrom multiplepeersconcurrently
peer apeer
Scalability Limitedbythe Limitedbythehigh Relativelygoodscalabilitydueto
centralservers searchcost superpeers
Faulttolerance Singlepointoffailure Goodfaulttolerance Superpeersarevulnerableto
duetoequality attacks
amongpeers
file-sharing systems, data is distributed randomly over the peers. Flooding on the overlay is used to
find files in response to requests. The TTL is imposed to limit the flooding, in order to save heavy
traffic generated by flooding. Moreover, there is no guarantee on the search results.
The major difference among these systems lies in the fact that Napster applies a centralized con-
trol, Gnutella uses pure P2P networking, and KaZaA applies a hierarchical structure. Napster has a
constant search time. Flooding in Gnutella takes the longest search time across the entire network.
KaZaA performs in between, because binary search is conducted only across the super nodes. Both
Napter and Gnutella have limited scalability. KaZaA has better scalability. However, these three
P2P file-sharing services have all suffered greatly from illegal downloads by copyright violators in
recent years.
Example 8.5 Gnutella (Version 0.4) Networks with Flooding Search
The Gnutella file-sharing application leveragesthe pure P2P model. Each peer has equalroles and acts as
either a serverwhen uploadingfiles to othersor a clientwhen downloadingfiles from others. Apeer isalso
called a servant. Gnutella defines a number of messages, called descriptors. Flooding-based search is
used to locate highly replicated items,as illustrated in Figure8.10. Each nodesends the requests tomulti-
ple neighboring nodes, which can send to more nodes, and thus flood the entire network. This flooding
scheme may create heavy traffic to saturate the network. Therefore, the messages to send or to forward
and the hopcountin forwardingmustbe limited.
Figure 8.11 shows the descriptor header and payload. The header consists of 22 bytes. The descriptor
ID uses the first 16 bytes. It is a unique identifier for the descriptor in the network. The payload descriptor


===== page 518 =====
8.2 P2P Overlay Networks and Properties 495
FIGURE8.10
FloodingschemeusedinGnutellatosearchforpeersthatcanprovidefilesofdigitalcontent.
Header Payload
Payload Payload
Descriptor ID TTL Hops Payload
descriptor length
Byte
offset
0 15 16 17 18 19 22 Variable
FIGURE8.11
Gnutellapacketdescriptorformat.
onlyuses1byte.Gnutelladefinesfivemaintypesofdescriptor,includingPing(0X00),Pong(0X01),Query
(0X40), QueryHit (0X80), and push (0X80). The TTL and Hops fields use one byte each. TTL is initialized
by the descriptor originator and is decreased by one once the descriptor traverses one servant. When TTL
reaches 0,the descriptor is discarded.
TheTTLisusedtolimitthehorizonofthe descriptorinordertosavethecommunication costofunlim-
ited flooding. The Hops field counts the number of hops the descriptor has traveled. The last four bytes in
the header is for payloadlength, which is followed byvariable payload.For example, The Pinghas nopay-
load, whileotherfour descriptors, payload isfilled with bytesof variablesize.
The Ping descriptor is used by servants to discover others. A servant that receives a Ping sends back
one or more Pong descriptors along the path of Ping with a reverse direction. A Pong consists of the
address of the responsible servant and the amount of data it shares. Query descriptors are for search,
while a QueryHit descriptor is the response to a Query. The Push descriptor enables firewalled servants to
share files with others. A new servant contacts bootstrap nodes to join. After joining the system, a servant
communicateswith others usingdescriptors. Itsends a Pingto discovermoreservantsto connectwith.
In general, the Ping and Query descriptors are sent in a flooding fashion. A servant that receives such
a descriptor will forward the descriptor to its neighboring servants. Clearly, if the horizon of the flooding is
not limited, such descriptors would, on average, be forwarded to d neighbors by each peer, where dis the
average number of neighboring peers of each node. Thus, an n-node Gnutella system must use d*n


===== page 519 =====
496 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
messages, within which (d-1)*n messages are duplicated. Such a large number of messages limits system
scalability.
GnutellalimitsthehorizonoffloodingwithaTTLineachdescriptor.TheTTLisdecreasedbyoneeach
timethedescriptorisforwarded.Ifthe TTLexpires,thatis,itreaches0,thedescriptorisdiscardedwithout
further forwarding. By default, the TTL is set at 7 since within this horizon, 95 percent of servants can be
reached. However, the requested files may be owed only by the unreached 5 percent of servants. In such
cases,the requests cannotbesatisfied, eventhoughfiles that matchthe requests doexist.
The flooding search in Gnutella is suitable for highly replicated files (i.e., hay), not for rarely replicated
ones (i.e., needle). Since users often request hay, Gnutella works well in practice. The request originator
downloads the file from one peerdirectly using HTTP. From version 0.6, Gnutella leverages powerful peers
as ultrapeers to construct hierarchical architecture similar to KaZaA’s. The descriptors are only flooded
among ultrapeers, greatlyreducing searchcost andimproving scalability.
8.2.2 Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs)
As shown in Figure 8.12, a distributed hash table (DHT) is middleware which offers information
search or table lookup services for a distributed system, especially for P2P systems. A hash table is
often represented by (key, value) pairs. DHT stores such pairs in an identifier space. For example,
an identifier space, represented by 64-bit binary strings, can accommodate 264 keys, representing
the same number of data objects. Using separate hash functions, the DHT maps the data objects
into the keys. The (key, data) pairs are distributed to the peers in a P2P network. The identifier of a
peer is the hash value of its address using certain hash function such as SHA-1.
The ownership of the identifier space is distributed among the peer nodes. DHTs provide a
lookup service similar to a hash table: (key, value) pairs used in other mapping services. Any parti-
cipating peer can retrieve the value associated with a given key. In a P2P network structured with
DHT support, the mapping from keys to values is distributed among the peer nodes. Any peer join-
ing or leaving should cause minimal disruption to the entire P2P network. An efficient DHT design
should scale to an extremely large identifier space such as 264 or even greater such as 2256.
Doc Hash function1 AaBb1234
Peers
Video Hash function2 CcDd7890
P2P network
Audio Hash function3 EeFf5678
Data objects Hashed keys
FIGURE 8.12
Keymappingindistributedhashtables(DHTs).


===== page 520 =====
8.2 P2P Overlay Networks and Properties 497
TheDHTappliesconsistenthashingtomapkeystonodes.Thisconsistenthashingshouldbeable
to define an abstract notion of proximity or distance between two nodes. Keys are mapped to the
nearestnodeswiththeminimumdistanceormaximumproximity.Whenanewnodejoinsoranexist-
ingnodeleaves,consistenthashingcausesasmallimpactonexistingnodesbyreassigningtheirkeys.
Fornnodeswithkkeys,eachnodeisresponsiblefor,atmost,ð1+εÞ/nofthewholeIDspacewitha
high probability. The addition or deletion of a node requires Oð1/nÞ keys to reassign, where
ε=OðlognÞ:Thus,theDHTissuitableforP2Psystemswherenodesleaveandjoinfrequently.
The DHT provides two primitive operations: put (key, data) and get (key). The put primitive
stores the date or data index with the key on the node which has the closest identifier to the key,
while the get primitive retrieves the node that stores the data or data index with the key. Peer nodes
form an overlay network. Every node keeps several links to a subset of other nodes. The get request
for a key with identifier k is forwarded over the overlay to the nearest node, until the request arrives
at the node with an identifier closest to k.
Popular P2P networks that use DHTs include BitTorrent’s distributed tracker, the Bitcoin mone-
tary network, the Kad network, the Storm botnet, YaCy, and the Coral Content Distribution Net-
work. Some prominent research projects including the Chord project; the PAST storage utility;
P-Grid, a self-organized and emerging overlay network; and the CoopNet content distribution sys-
tem also apply the DHT in their overlay constructions. Others apply the DHT in resource discovery
in grid computing systems. Resource discovery searches for suitable resource types to match with
user application demands.
8.2.2.1 DHT Deployment
The DHT acts as a substrate to provide two primitives: put (key, data) and get (key). The basic idea
is to map nodes and keys into the identifier space and assign keys to closer nodes in this space.
This enables fast search with guaranteed lookup success and provable bounds on the search time.
Moreover, such overlay networks avoid high search costs by flooding, and thus are more scalable.
However, it should be noted that DHT-based structured P2P overlays only directly support exact-
match search, rather than keyword search. Figure 8.13 shows the role of a DHT in mapping P2P
user applications to desired source machines through proper TCP/IP connections.
Mobility Persist P2P
P2P application layer
management storage e-mail
P2P substrate
(self-organizing
DHT
overlay network)
TCP/IP Internet
FIGURE8.13
DHTforfastandsecuresearchandotherInternetapplications.


===== page 521 =====
498 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
8.2.3 Structured P2P Overlay Networks
In a ring structure, each node has two neighbors: its successor and its predecessor along the ring. If
a node A is inserted at the interval between B and C, it has to take these two nodes as its neigh-
bors. In a tree structure, a node can only build neighboring links with its child nodes and parent
node. Although any P2P overlay network that has a logical predefined structure is considered struc-
tured, the most popular structured overlays are DHT-based.
Structured P2P networks employ a globally consistent protocol to ensure that any node can effi-
ciently route a search to some peer that has the desired file, even if the file is extremely rare. Such
a guarantee necessitates a more structured pattern of overlay links. By far the most common type of
structured P2P network is the DHT, in which a variant of consistent hashing is used to assign own-
ership of each file to a particular peer, in a way analogous to a traditional hash table’s assignment
of each key to a particular array slot. Table 8.3 summarizes various structured P2P overlay net-
works; three examples follow the table. An n-node network with b bits per node identifier is consid-
ered here.
(cid:129) Distributed hash tables Use distributed hashing with key lookup to avoid flooding at the
expense of losing data locality. Good examples are Tapestry, Pastry, Chord, and CAN.
(cid:129) Tree-structure system Preserves data locality with a tree-structured data access hierarchy.
A good example is the TerraDir system.
(cid:129) Skip-list-based systems Accelerates query processing by key ordering rather key lookup. Two
good examples are Skip Graphs and SkipNet.
Due to the random selection of neighboring peers, there often exists a topology mismatch
problem between overlay and physical topologies in P2P systems. Location awareness or network
proximity awareness solves the mismatch problem by allowing nodes to select neighboring peers on
overlay networks according to peers’ locations on physical networks.
In DHT-based structured P2P overlays, the neighbors of a node are not selected randomly from
all the peers on the overlay, but only from the ones whose identifiers are subject to special require-
ments. Addition or deletion of a node requires few recovery operations, which facilitates large-scale
deployment. There are different overlay structures for DHT-based overlay networks, which yield
Table 8.3 A Comparisonof ThreeStructured P2POverlay Networks
OverlayNetworks Chord[45] CAN[40] Pastry[39]
IdentifierSpace Chordalringwithdirect d-dimensional High-radixidentifier
fingersconnectingto coordinates spacethatdivides
nodesindistance nodesintonested
intervals proximitygroups
Routingstate logn 2d 2×2blog n
2b
LookupProtocol Matchingdatakeyand Mappingkeytoapoint Matchingkeyandprefix
nodeidentifier inthed-dimcoordinate ofnodeidentifier
Routingcomplexity O(logn) O(d×n1/d) Oðlog nÞ
2b
Numberofmessages log2n 2d log n
2b
perjoin/leaveoperation


===== page 522 =====
8.2 P2P Overlay Networks and Properties 499
different structured P2P systems, such as Chord, Pastry, CAN, and Kademlia. This section focuses
on the structures of these structured P2P systems. In Table 8.3, n is the number of nodes in the P2P
network. The quantity 2b for specifying Pastry is the base of the identifier space. The “log” implies
the binary base 2.
A good example of DHT systems, Chord, is introduced in Example 8.6. The identifier space of
m-bit strings is mapped to a unidirectional logical ring modulo 2m. The distance between the identi-
fier id and the identifier id is measured by the interval traveled from id to id in a clockwise
1 2 1 2
direction. Nodes are placed at the position where the node’s identifier can be found. A node with
identifier id stores the data or data index with key identifiers falling into the interval from the
x
immediate predecessor of id to id itself. Each node keeps m chordal links to the nodes whose
x x
identifiers immediately succeed ðx+2iÞmod2m for 0≤i≤m−1:
Example 8.6 Chord System—A DHT-Based Chordal Ring
Chord is a typical DHT system which organizes peers in a unidirectional ring augmented with chord links
for scalable search [45]. Nodes and keys are mapped to the same m-bit identifier (ID) space using SHA-1
as the base hash function. A peer’s ID is generated by hashing the peer’s IP address, while a key’s ID is
assignedbyhashingthedatakey.Identifiersarerepresentedontheringmodulo2m.Apeerisresponsible
for thering intervalfrom the previousID to itsownID. Thatis, thedata(or the index)with keysmapped to
this interval is stored on this peer. The distance from an ID1 to another ID2 is the interval from ID1 along
the clockwise directionof the ring toID2.
Besides the predecessor and successor on the ring, each node maintains a finger table which consists
of the nodes pointed by the chord links from that node. The i-th ð0≤i<mÞ entry in a node’s finger table
referstothenodewhoseidentifieris2iawayalongtheclockwisedirection,wheremistheidentifierlength.
A 3-bit identifier ring with four nodes and the finger table of node 8 are shown in Figure 8.14. Node N6 is
14
10
0
Gap Span Scsr
1
8 1 (1,2) 1
2 (2,4) 3
3
6 3 (4,8) 6
8 (8,1) 10
Node 0 finger table
FIGURE8.14
AnexampleofaChordnetworkwitha16-keysearchspace.Thefingertableestablishesthedirectlinks
betweenthepopulatednodeslocatedinvariousspanintervals.


===== page 523 =====
500 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
22 away from N1. Although there are m entries in a peer’s finger table, on the average, a peer’s finger
table contains O(log n) nodalinformation, where nisthe total number of nodes inthe searchspace.
In Figure 8.14, N1’s finger table has three rows. However, the first two rows contain the same node’s
information, that is, N3’s information. This is stemmed from the fact that the identifier range which starts
from a node to its bm−lognc-th entry is within distance 2m=n: Since nodes are randomly distributed on
the identifier ring, an average of one node is within the range 2m=n: Thus, on average, the number of
nodes in a node’s finger table is Oðm−bm−lognc+1Þ=OðlognÞ: DHT-based search is often used to
locate rarelyreplicated items.
To improve robustness, each node maintains a successor list. The list starts from its successor down
the ring. If the current successor fails, a node replaces the fault successor with the first live entry in the
list. A newly coming node of ID X first contacts a bootstrap node, which forwards the join message to X’s
predecessor Y. The new node joins as Y’s successor and Y finds entries to fulfill the finger table for the
new node. The nodeswhose finger tablesshould contain X update their tables. The join/leave operation of
a node requires using log2n messages. Chord uses a stabilization procedure running periodically on each
node toupdate the successor andfinger tableentries.
Example 8.7 The CAN System: A Multidimensional Mesh Architecture
CAN (Content Addressable Network) organizes nodes in a virtual d-dimension Cartesian coordinate space
on a d-torus. The coordinate space is dynamically split into n disjoint zones and each node owns one,
where nis the number of nodes. Anexample ofa 2D coordinatespace whichis partitioned intofive nodes
is given in Figure 8.15. Nodes store their neighbors’ information (i.e., IP addresses and the zone informa-
tion that they own) as their route tables. Two nodes are neighbors if their zones span overlap along (d-1)
dimensions andabutalong onedimension.
(0.5~0.75, 0.5~1)
1
F C
B D
E
(0~0.5, 0.5~1)
B A D
(0.5~0.75, 0.5~1)
E
A C
(0~0.5, 0~0.5) (0.5~1, 0~0.5)
0
G H
0 1
(a) The CAN architecture (b) Routing in CAN
FIGURE 8.15
ACANnetworkconstructedbytherepeatedpartitioningofthe2Dcoordinatedspaceanditsroutingprocess.
(CourtesyofS.Ratnasamy,P.Francis,andR.Karp[40])


===== page 524 =====
8.2 P2P Overlay Networks and Properties 501
In Figure 8.15(a), node B and node C are neighbors of node A, but node D is not A’s neighbor. Keys
are mapped to coordinate space using uniform hash functions. Each key is associated with a d-dimension
vector, which represents its position in the coordinate space. If a key’s position in the coordinate space
falls in the zone owned by a node i, node i stores the pointer to the object related to the key or directly
stores the object. In a d-dimension coordinate space, each node maintains 2d neighbors on average and
the routecomplexity isof the orderofOððd=4Þðn1=dÞÞ:
A new coming node X contacts a bootstrap node, which is located using the DNS service. The boot-
strap node supplies the address information of some randomly chosen peers populated in the overlay. The
new node randomly chooses a point P in the coordinate space as its position and asks a populated node
to route the join message to the node Y whose zone contains P. The node Y splits its zone into two parts
with equalquotaand handsoverone subzonetothe incoming node.
The CAN overlay uses a greedy routing algorithm. A node greedily forwards the message to its neigh-
bor with coordinates closest to the destination. Figure 8.15(b) shows a 2D CAN overlay and the routing
path from node C to node H. In a CAN overlay with d-dimension coordinates, on the average, each
dimension has n1=d nodes. On a torus, there are 1/4n1=d nodes between any two nodes on the average.
Since a message to its destination traverses all d dimensions, this yields the routing complexity, which is
Oððd=4Þðn1=dÞÞ:
8.2.4 Hierarchically Structured Overlay Networks
A hybrid P2P overlay network holds the features of unstructured and structured overlay network at
the same time. There are always two types of approaches to building hybrid P2P overlay networks.
The first involves adding structured overlays on top of unstructured overlays. For example, one can
embed Chord on top of a Gnutella overlay. The flooding search protocol in Gnutella is suitable for
locating highly replicated files (hays). However, for queries of rarely replicated files (needles),
flooding requires a long time for a response, or even gives no response. A hybrid P2P overlay is
often built by maintaining the primary components while getting the secondary components for
free. In Figure 8.16, the route table of a Pastry node is selected. The global random peer informa-
tion is provided by the leaf set of the Pastry node. In this way, the overhead of Pastry is related to
locate nearby nodes to fill the routing tables.
Peer Peer
Pastry Interest-based Pastry Interest-based
Leaf set Cluster view Leaf set Cluster view
Routing table Random view Routing table Random view
Filled with Replaced by
FIGURE8.16
TheintuitionofthehybridP2Poverlayconstructionbykeepingtheprimarycomponentsandgettingthe
secondarycomponentsforfree.


===== page 525 =====
502 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Example 8.8 KaZaA Network Using Super Nodes to Form a Backbone Overlay
KaZaAconnectspeersinatwo-layerhierarchicalstructure(seeFigure8.17).Theupperlayerconsistsof
supernodesthataremorepowerfulintermsofCPU,bandwidth,andstability.Lightweightusernodesare
assumedatthesecondlayer,andareconnectedtoaparentsupernode.Asupernodeactsasahubfor
usernodes.Ausernodeuploadstoitsparentsupernodethefilename,contenthash,andfiledescriptionof
eachrequestedfile.Thus,eachsupernodemaintainsthefileindicesforallofitschildrennodes.Thesuper
nodeprovideseachchildwithasuper-nodelist,whichcontainsupto200supernodesinthesystem.
In 2006, more than 3 million peers of KaZaA shared more than 3,000 terabytes of digital content,
including MP3s, videos, and games. At one time, more than 50 percent of Internet traffic was generated
by KaZaA users. On average, it takes 56 minutes to connect to the end super node. Each super node has
about 100 to 150 children. In total, the system has roughly 30,000 super nodes. Each super node has
TCP connections to 30–50 other super nodes. The system is not fully connected. Among the super nodes
thereis 0.1percentconnectivity with anaverageof 23minutes to connecttwosuper nodes.
Each super node acts like a mini-Napster hub by tracking the content and IP addresses of its descen-
dants. The super node is represented with its IP address, port number, workload, timestamp, and similar
data. This list is cached at the user node for use in bootstrapping and failure recovery. KaZaA encrypts all
its signaling traffic. A query from a user node is first submitted to its parent super node. If any files match
the query, the super node directly answers the query. Otherwise, the super node forwards the query to
other super nodes using TTL-limited flooding. KaZaA uses the UUHash to identify files uniquely. Nodes
request files from multiple peersusingthis uniqueidentifier in orderto enableparallel downloading.
The UUHash hashes the first 300 KB of a file using MD5, yielding a 128-bit hash value. It applies a
smallhash function to 300 KB blocks at file offsets 2m MB, with m being an integer from 0 until the offset
reaches the end. The smallhash generates a 32-bit hash value. The MD5 hash and this smallhash are
concatenated, yielding a 160-bit hash as the file identifier. The UUHash is simple since it only hashes a
fraction of the file. This weakness allows users to easily modify large parts of the file without changing the
UUHash identifier. However, copyright infringement is still a serious problem. Both DDoS attacks on super
nodes andcontentpollution havebeen encounteredinthe past.
Super nodes
User nodes
FIGURE 8.17
TheKaZaAarchitecturebuiltwithsupernodesformingabackboneoverlay.


===== page 526 =====
8.2 P2P Overlay Networks and Properties 503
The system automatically switches to a new download server when the current server fails to deliver.
The system also gives the estimated download time to users. Super nodes are relatively stable; thus node
churns have a limited effect. The bandwidth on a super node is low, even in relaying VoIP traffic. The two-
layer structure takes heterogeneity in capacity into account and enables network proximity awareness by
assigning usernodesto nearbysuper nodes.Floodingisperformed ontop of theupper layer,thusimprov-
ing scalability.However, itstill doesnot providereal guarantees onsearchscopeand searchtime.
Example 8.9 Embedding Chord on Top of a Gnutella Network
Figure 8.18 shows the hybrid architecture that results after embedding Chord on top of Gnutella. For any
query, the DHT-based Chord responds almost within the same time as long as there is at least one file to
satisfy thequery. Thus, Chordperforms wellfor needlequeries.
For queriesto hays, it takes longer to respond. In Gnutella version 0.6, a portion of the powerful nodes
(ultrapeers) are selected as hubs for ordinary nodes (leaf peers). Queries for hays are forwarded using
flooding, in order to be responded to, while queries for needles follow the Chord search protocol. Hence,
queriesto haysand needlescanrespondfaster.
8.2.4.1 Overlay Complexity Analysis
Table 8.4 summarizes the functional features and complexity characteristics of five P2P networks.
All five are self-organized and cannot support node heterogeneity. Data locality is not preserved in
L
L
L
L U1
L
H2
H1
H3
H4
L
L
L
L
L Gnutella leaf U Gnutella ultrapeer Gnutella links Chord links
H Hybrid ultrapeer (Chord + Gnutella)
FIGURE8.18
AhybridP2ParchitectureofGnutellaandChord.


===== page 527 =====
Table 8.4 Complexity Properties of SixP2P OverlayNetworks
Features Gnutella[60] Chord[45] CAN[40] TerraDir SkipNet
Overlaystructure Random Circularidentifierspace Multi-dim. Treedatahierarchy Distributedskiplist
Cartesianspace
Designparameters N/A r:Immediatesuccessors d:dimensionality N/A N/A
Routinghops O(N) O(logN) O(d·N1/d) O(h),treeheight O(logN)
Nodestate O(1) O(logN) O(2d) O(1) O(2logN)
Nodejoin O(1) O(logN) O(2d) O(1) O(logN)
Loadbalancingand N/A Viaconsistenthashing Partitionedspace, Viacachingand Consistenthashing
reducingquery andvirtualnodes zonereassignment, replication thesuffixofobject
hotspots cachingand name
replication
Faulthandling Floodingto Successorslist, Multiplerealities, Nodereplication, Redundant
othervalid applicationlayer overloadingzones routingtonextbest neighborsatlevel0,
neighbors replication prefixnode survivefailuresat
boundary
Networkproximity No Proximityroutingto Topology-aware No Proximityneighbor
finger’ssuccessorwith overlayand selectionvia
lowestlatency proximityrouting P-Tableand
C-Table
Supportnode No No,butmightthrough No,butmightsplit No No
heterogeneity virtualnodes zonesproportional
tonodecapabilities
Self-organization Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Guarantee No,only Yes Yes Yes Yes
determinate within
searchingresults broadcast
scope
Datalocality No No,destroyedby No,destroyedby Yes Yes
uniformhashing mappingtohyper
spaceviauniform
hashing
Applications N/A CFS[27] Data-centricsensor Resourcediscovery Globalevent
networks notificationservice
CourtesyofMinCai,EE657Report,UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,2006.
504


===== page 528 =====
8.3 Routing, Proximity, and Fault Tolerance 505
all five overlay structures. With uniform routing, both Chord and CAN destroy data locality easily.
Network proximity is supported only in Chord, CAN, and SkipNet. They all (except Gnutella) guar-
antee determinate search results. Gnutella applies a random graph. Chord applies a chordal identifier
space using fingers to identify immediate successors.
CAN applies a multidimensional Cartesian space. TerraDir has a tree data hierarchy and Skip-
Net uses a distributed skip list. The major attraction of Gnutella is its constant node state and
node joining time, but its routing time is the longest, O(n). Flooding in Gnutella is an expensive
way to search, but it supports fault tolerance. The rest all support fault tolerance using replication
techniques. O(log n) routing speed is achieved in Chord and SkipNet. The routing time in Terra-
Dir is proportional to the tree height (h) applied. The dimension d of CAN affects its performance
greatly.
8.3 ROUTING, PROXIMITY, AND FAULT TOLERANCE
In this section, two fundamental techniques related to P2P systems will be discussed, namely rout-
ing and locality awareness. In P2P systems, peer nodes are organized in decentralized and self-
organizing overlay networks. The routing algorithms, which indicate how to get to a specific node
from any node, should be distributed and only relay on nodes in the local view of the whole sys-
tem. Locality awareness, also called proximity awareness, is a mechanism to let peer nodes be
prone to connect with physically close peers, in order to reduce average overlay link latency and
backbone network bandwidth consumption. The P2P overlay network is ad hoc. Thus, these
mechanisms are required to tolerate and recover peer failures and disconnections.
8.3.1 Routing in P2P Overlay Networks
Unstructured P2P overlay networks give no indication of how to locate a specified node since
node neighborhoods are randomly selected and are not subject to constraints. The routing algo-
rithms in unstructured P2P overlay networks are always based on blind flooding. When receiving
a message, a peer node simply forwards it to all its neighbors except the one from which it
receives the message. Suppose the number of nodes is n and the average node degree (i.e., the
number of neighbors) is k. The number of messages used for locating a node is nðk−1Þ on
average.
The number of messages used for locating a node is nðk−1Þ on average. Since a message fol-
lows the shortest path from the source to the destination, the route complexity, which is defined as
the expected number of overlay hops for a message to reach a specified node from any node, is
directly determined by the overlay graph diameter. Overlay networks based on small-world graphs
have a short diameter, allowing for fast routing. Freenet [10] is such an overlay network.
Example 8.10 Freenet—An Unstructured P2P Network
Freenet is a decentralized storage service, which provides good anonymity and censorship resilience. Its
architecture belongs to unstructured overlay networks since it allows any node to be a neighbor to any
other node. Each node contributes a storage space to the system. Nodes and files are mapped to the


===== page 529 =====
506 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
same ID space using hash functions. A file is
Key Next_hop Data
encrypted and stored at a node with the ID closest
123 2 0×abc to the file’s ID. Files may be split into multiple
chunks, with additional chunks added to provide
234 3 0×c4z
redundancy. Each chunk is handled independently
overdistributed nodes.
564 7
Freenet uses a key-based route protocol to find
789 8 requested files. Both publishers and readers of files
are hidden from the outside. Data files that are
FIGURE 8.19 stored on a node form a datastore stack, which is
Anexampleofadatastorestackofanodeinthe illustrated as an example in Figure 8.19. The stack
Freenet. is divided into two parts. The top part stores the
keys, node references of the next hop, and data,
while the bottom part only stores keys and node references. When receiving a new file insertion request, a
node puts the information at the top of the stack. If the stack is full, LRU (least recent used) is used to
swap out old entries. Unlike Gnutella, in Freenet, even if the file publishers leave the network, files are still
available.
The routing in Freenet is similar as the routing used in IP. The datastore stacks are taken as routing
tables. For a request of a file with key k, if the key can be found in its routing table, the node stops for-
warding the request and replies to the upstream requester. Otherwise, the node forwards the request to
the node indicated by the next hop reference of the entry with the closed key to k. The horizon of a
request is limited by the TTL. If data is not found when the TTL expires, a failure is reported. If data is
found, itiscached oneachnode alongthe request path.
The same process is used for insertion of data: The data to be inserted is cached on each node along
the path to the target node. Thus, a request to a data file will cause the file to be replicated more.
The request originator may connect the node that answered the request, while discarding old nodes that
are least recently used. This is called path folding, and would cause a clustered structure. Path folding
makes the simple routing protocol used in Freenet well performed. Anonymity is achieved by randomly
modifying the sourceof messages astheytraverse the network.
DHT-based structured P2P overlay networks have strict and predefined structures, which
facilitate message routing. Each node is associated with a globally unique identifier. The routing
process to a destination node gradually reduces the identifier’s distance from the message pro-
cessing node to the destination node. Although different structured overlays have different rout-
ing algorithms, the routing complexities are OðlognÞ, where n is the number of nodes. We
describe the routing algorithms for three representative structured P2P overlays in the following
examples.
Example 8.11 Table-Lookup Search in a DHT-Based Chord Network
Chord overlay networks resort to finger tables to efficiently route messages. When receiving a message
whose destination is y, a node x forwards it to the node in its finger table which is the closest one to y in
the identifier space. To this end, node x checks its finger table in a reverse order. The first node whose


===== page 530 =====
8.3 Routing, Proximity, and Fault Tolerance 507
identifier is smaller than y is chosen as the next step node. For example, in Figure 8.20, seven nodes are
populated ina 16-nodechordstructure. Theminimum routing pathfrom node0to node8is vianode 6.
The routing complexity for the chord is OðlognÞ for ann-nodesystem. Suppose that node xselects the
i-th entry in its finger table as the next step node z. Then node z is at least 2i away from x in the identifier
space.Sincetheidentifierofthe(i+1)-thentryofx’sfingertableisnotsmallerthany,nodeyisatmost2i+1
awayfromxintheidentifierspace.Therefore,thedistancebetweennodexandzisatleastequaltothe
distance between nodes z and y, which means node z halves the distance between nodes x and y.
Afterlognsteps,thedistancebetweenthesourcenodetothedestinationisequalto2m=n,wheremisthe
identifierlength.Sincethepopulatednodesarerandomlydistributed,anaverageofonenodeexistsineach
oftherange2m=n:
8.3.2 Network Proximity in P2P Overlays
P2P overlay networks are logical structures over IP networks. While randomized overlay graphs are
fault tolerant and have a low diameter, they ignore the network proximity information on the IP net-
works. This causes two physically close peers to be far from each other in the overlay network,
while two nodes that are close in the overlay network are far from each other in the physical net-
work. This scenario is denoted as topology mismatching. The problem also exists in structured P2P
overlay networks. For the CAN network, (Example 8.6, also Figure 8.15a), if nodes C and E belong
to the same autonomous system, while A and G belong to another, the messages from C to G
traverse the links between the two domains three times, which inevitably prolongs the delay and
consumes unnecessary network bandwidth.
As to the structured P2P overlay networks, node neighborhoods are so rigid that it is hard to
optimize them in terms of network proximity awareness. There are three types of approaches to
14
10
0
8 Gap Span Scsr
1 1 (1,2) 1
2 (2,4) 3
6
3 4 (4,8) 6
8 (8,1) 10
Routing path
Node 0 finger table
FIGURE8.20
AnexampleofthetablelookupsearchinaChordoverlaynetwork.


===== page 531 =====
508 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
exploit network proximity in structured P2P overlays: geographic layout, proximity routing, and
proximity neighbor selection.
8.3.2.1 Geographic Layout
Node identifiers are no longer random. Physically close nodes are assigned adjacent identifiers, and
therefore are close in the overlay network. Since many structured P2P overlay networks (e.g.,
Chord, Pastry, Tapestry) rely on the randomness of node identifiers to guarantee robustness and per-
formance, this approach is only suitable for some special overlays, such as CAN. For example, the
landmark binning scheme can be leveraged to build proximity-aware CAN overlay networks. In this
scenario, m publicly accessible nodes are chosen as landmark nodes. Each node measures the dis-
tance to these nodes and sorts them in terms of increasing distances, which yields an order of land-
mark nodes. The order represents the “bin” the node belongs to.
Physically close nodes are likely to belong to the same or similar bins. The coordinate space of
a CAN overlay network is divided into m! zones, one zone per bin. A new node randomly selects a
point from the zone which associates with its bin and joins. This achieves the goal that physically
close nodes are close in overlay networks. However, nodes are no longer randomly distributed on
the coordinate space. It is possible that a small portion of the nodes occupy most of the identifier
space. These nodes are vulnerable to overloading.
8.3.2.2 Proximity Routing
There are always multiple paths between any two nodes in P2P overlay networks. For the CAN in
Example8.7(Figure8.15b),thenodeCcanfolloweitherpathC-A-BorpathC-F-BtogettonodeB.
The idea behind proximity routing is to select the path with minimum delay. However, in distributed
overlay networks, finding this path is as complex as a Traveling Salesman Problem, which is NP-
hard. A heuristic way is that each node selects the closest neighbor as the target node to forward
messages. However, this may increase routing path length. For example, in a Chord overlay network,
if each node selects its successor as the target node, the routing complexity is O(n). Therefore, the
candidate target nodes are limited to a small number. The best example overlay for proximity routing
is the Pastry network. We introduce the Pastry architecture in the following example.
Example 8.12 Pastry—A Proximity-Routing Overlay with Nested Groups
The Pastry is a structured overlay, which has an identifier space coded with high-radix digits. The purpose
is to subdivide the peer nodes into nested groups with layers of subgroups. those nodes in the same
innner-most subgroup are very close neighbors, known as proximity subgroups. The overlay using high
radix identifiers to search the nodes in the nested groups or subgroups. For example, a 128-bit identifier
space can specify a very large P2P network with identifier viewed as base-16 numbers (base 2b for b=4)
like65A1FC04. Theidentifiers are divided into groupswith 16subgroups pereachgroup.
Each data key is stored in a node with the closest identifier. Node addressing defines the subgroups.
Nodes in the same subgroup know each other’s address, Thus, the search time can be significantly
reduced for being in the same proximity group. Furthermore, each node knows the IP address of one
delegate node in some of the other groups. Each node needs to know the IP addresses of all up nodes in
its inner group. The proximity routing is applied to perform fast search in log n steps, where 2b=16.
2b


===== page 532 =====
8.3 Routing, Proximity, and Fault Tolerance 509
For n=216 nodes or 64 K nodes, it takes at most 4 routing steps (log 32K) to route the messages
16
among16 groups,compared with log 64K=16steps neededinusingChord.
2
With node failures, the Pastry is definitely faster than Chord and CAN. During failure recovery, the
Pastry maytakeO(n) routinghops at the worst case. Each routingtable entry points to a node close to the
local node in the proximity space, among all node identifiers with the appropriate prefix. In a way, Pastry
has the best locality properties. The expected distance traveled by a message is within a small constant in
the proximity space. Pastry is suitable to use in building very large P2P networks. The fast lookup search
withinproximity spacemakesPastry verysuitable touseinverylarge-scaleP2Pnetworks.DetailsofPastry
canbefound in[21].
8.3.2.3 Proximity Neighbor Selection
Nodes choose physically close nodes as their neighbors in overlay networks. In structured P2P net-
works, the identifiers of a node’s neighbors should be subject to some constraints. For example, in
Pastry networks, the nodes in the i-th row of a node’s routing table should share i-digit long prefix
with the node identifiers. This approach can also be applied in Chord overlay networks. Instead of
fixing the i-th entry of node x’s finger table to the node whose identifier is (x+2i) mod 2m
(0≤i<m, m is the length of identifiers), node x selects the physically closest node whose identifier
falls in the range
½x+2i,x+2i+1(cid:2):
This change does not affect routing complexity. Landmark clusters with the dimension reduction
algorithm is a wildly used scheme. Each node measures the delay to m landmark nodes which are
publicly accessible. The measurement yields an m-dimension vector which acts as the node position
in an m-dimension landmark space. The idea behind this is that physically close nodes are also
close in the landmark space. Then, space filling curves are used to map the m-dimension vectors to
a space with lower dimensions. For Chord, the vectors are mapped to one dimension number. The
space-filling curves preserve the proximity information. The mapped results are stored on the over-
lays based on their specific protocol, which facilitates archival of close nodes. The landmark cluster
scheme is coarse-grained and cannot distinguish two physically close nodes. Thus, RTT measure-
ment can be further combined.
Compared with structured overlay networks, unstructured networks are easier to optimize in
terms of network proximity, because the node neighborhood relationships are more flexible in
unstructured overlay networks. The optimization operation is a process of deleting high-cost overlay
connections and adding low-cost ones. The key problem is how to identify high/low-cost overlay
connections and cut/establish them in a decentralized way. A simple approach is that each node
actively measures link costs (i.e., latencies) to its neighbors. The high-cost overlay links are discon-
nected if they are redundant. Nodes probe one another to locate closer nodes and build the overlay
connections.
8.3.3 Fault Tolerance and Failure Recovery
This section covers fault tolerance and failure recovery techniques developed for upholding P2P
operations under faulty and failure conditions.


===== page 533 =====
510 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
8.3.3.1 Faults and Node Failures
Node failures also have a vital impact on P2P overlay connectivity. The links to a node would be
disconnected if the node failed. The extent of the impact on overlay connectivity caused by node
failures depends on the graph property of the overlay and the degree (i.e., number of neighbor
links) of the faulty node. For instance, in a power-law graph-based P2P overlay network like
Gnutella 0.4, failures of a subset of randomly selecting nodes would not fragment the overlay into
disconnectedportions.However,failuresofsomehigh-degreenodeswouldeasilyshattertheoverlay
intopiecesofdisconnectedcomponents.
DHT-based structured P2P systems implement OðlognÞ lookup time by building OðlognÞ neigh-
bor links for every node. The overlay neighbors of a node should be selected according to the pre-
defined rules, rather than selected randomly. For example, in Chord, the i-th entry in a node x’s
finger table should be the successor of ðx+2iÞmod2m, where 0≤x≤m−1 and m is the length of
the ID. Structured P2P systems rely on these neighbors to accelerate the lookup service, rather than
guarantee overlay connectivity. Thus, a neighbor failure would delay resource lookups. Overlay
connectivity is guaranteed in other ways. In Chord, each node maintains OðlognÞ immediate succes-
sors to achieve this goal.
The aforementioned node faults are simply considered crash failures or silent failures, which
means the fault nodes just do not respond to the messages sent to them (i.e., they stay silent).
Another type of fault is the Byzantine failure, which means the fault nodes behave inconsistently
when communicating with others. Byzantine failures are often triggered by attacks and discussed in
the context of DHT-based P2P systems. DHT-based P2P systems are more vulnerable in the case of
Byzantine failures. An adversary can elaborately select the IP addresses for Byzantine peers and
where the peers join the network in order to put them in critical positions. When processing lookup
requests, the Byzantine peers provide inconsistent answers for the same request, which delays the
lookup service or even makes the system useless. On the other hand, unstructured P2P systems
flood the lookup requests. Thus, there are multiple disjointed paths from the query source to the
nodes which satisfy the requests.
Example 8.13 Failure Effects on Real-Life P2P Networks
The impact of node failures on a P2P network depends on the system architecture and the protocols
applied. In a central index server model such as Napster, the failures of the indexservers would pull down
the entire system, since the resource lookup service would be completely down, while in a pure P2P
model such as Gnutella 0.4, failures of individual nodes would have very little impact on lookup services
because all nodes wouldkeepthe indexes bythemselves.
In a super-node hybrid model like KaZaA, failure of the super nodes would cause index information
loss for those peers that connect with it. This implies that the resource lookup service will be downgraded
or shut down. In a DHT structured P2P network such as Chord, the resource index information is distribu-
ted almost evenly among all the nodes. Thus, the failures of the nodes inevitably deteriorate the perfor-
mance of the lookup service, but do not necessarily pull down the whole system. The resource sharing
service between twonodes wouldbeinterrupted ifeithernode fails. P2Pnetworksresort to service backup
and resourcerelocation toresume file-sharing services.


===== page 534 =====
8.3 Routing, Proximity, and Fault Tolerance 511
8.3.3.2 Analysis of Failure Recovery
Since failures occur frequently, P2P systems demand safe recovery from node failures. Chord
leverages stabilization operations to fix node failures. Another method is to let a node periodically
check the aliveness of a random neighbor in its finger table. In the case of an i-th entry failure in a
chordal ring, node x relocates the successor to ðx+2iÞmod2m, where 0≤i≤m−1: Nodes also peri-
odically verify their immediate successor. In Pastry, a failure of a routing table entry is detected
when forwarding lookup requests. As to the method for new node selection from backup node lists,
the random replacement strategy performs better than others in terms of churn if the distribution of
node duration time is highly skewed. Here, the new node is randomly chosen from several nodes to
replace the faulty one. The idea behind this is that the strategy is biased in favor of longer duration
nodes.
8.3.3.3 Fault Tolerance Techniques
Unlike traditional client/server model-based distributed systems, no node in P2P systems has a glo-
bal view. Nodes rely on themselves to detect faults and recover from failures in a fully decentra-
lized fashion. P2P overlay networks ensure stable throughput by providing redundancy. For
example, each node has multiple neighbors for service providers. The question is how many redun-
dancies are adequate. In Chord overlay networks, the successor lists are the key component for con-
nectivity and routing correctness.
Each node maintains a sequential successor list with length OðlognÞ, where n is the number of
nodes. If the current successor fails, a node replaces it with the first live entry in its successor list.
Suppose that node fails independently with probability 1/2. The probability that all the nodes in a
node’s successor list fail is ð1Þlog2n =1/n: Thus, with high probability every node is aware of its
2
immediate live successor, which is sufficient to guarantee overlay connectivity.
In unstructured P2P overlay networks, node neighborhoods are random and flexible. Nodes are
not required to maintain restrictive structures. Thus, they are considered more reliable than struc-
tured P2P overlays. The reliability of structured P2P networks means predefined structures are
maintained, while reliability demands at least one path between any pair of nodes.
In an overlay network based on a random graph with n nodes, if the probability p with which
there is a link between each pair of nodes is ðlogn+c+oð1ÞÞ/n, the overlay network is connected
with probability e
−e−c:
This result can be easily extended to a scenario where there are node and
link failures. Suppose link failures are independent of each other with probability q. In this case, to
achieve the connectivity probability e −e−c , the probability is p=ðlogn+c+oð1ÞÞ/ð1−qÞn:
8.3.3.4 Failure Analysis
If any node fails with a probability e
−aða>1Þ
independently, the base ring is connected with a high
probability that is more than
1−n1−a,
where e is the base of the natural logarithm. The results con-
firm that REM overlay is as resilient as the one in which each node maintains logn random neigh-
bors in the presence of random failures. In the preceding analysis, the failure resilience of overlay
networks is evaluated under random failures. However, in a proximity-aware overlay, the failures of
neighbor nodes may be correlated. Physically close nodes may fail concurrently due to network
congestion. Further work should evaluate the fault tolerance for proximity-aware overlays.


===== page 535 =====
512 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
8.3.4 Churn Resilience against Failures
A P2P network often faces disturbance from high node churns. The churns come from unexpected
node joins, departures, or failures. Node failures or sudden departures impose a great adverse effect
on network performance. This is caused by unavailability of data stored on the faulty nodes. The
nodes requesting service from the faulty nodes need to relocate the services elsewhere. Hence, a
P2P overlay network should be designed to be fault tolerant and churn resilient. This section is
devoted to overcoming the difficulties associated with churn and failure conditions that are fre-
quently encountered in a P2P network. A churn-resilient protocol (CRP) is presented to alleviate
churn effects.
8.3.4.1 Churn-Resilient Protocol (CRP)
A solution to increase fault tolerance in proximity-aware overlays is to guarantee connectivity of
critical links, such as random links among clusters or nodes. This can be achieved by providing
backup nodes to build the critical links. For example, in GoCast [47], each node maintains a node
cache as backups. Another example is CRP [24] for construction of proximity-aware and churn-
resilient P2P overlay networks.
The topology of the CRP-enabled overlay design looks like a ring augmented with extra chord
links. However, the overlay topology differs from Chord in that the extra links are not fixed fingers
from nodes. Instead, the chord links are established among nodes satisfying certain proximity prop-
erties. Both network proximity and capacity proximity are applied in CRP. Network proximity is
measured by the latency or closeness of two nodes in physical IP networks. This proximity enables
construction of low-latency chord links. Capacity proximity is measured by the closeness of nodes
with respect to node capacities. Capacity proximity allows the grouping of nodes with similar capa-
cities into clusters.
8.3.4.2 Overlay Construction Using CRP
The initial base ring with three nodes is shown in Figure 8.21(a). The ring is assumed to be unidir-
ectional with clockwise links shown by dotted edges. We assume that all ring links are weighted
with one unit. Node A’s successor and predecessor are B and C, respectively. The fourth node D is
inserted into the interval between A and C in Figure 8.21(b). A chord link weighted with 0.7 is
addedbetweennodesBandD.InFigure8.21(c),thefifthnodeEisinsertedbetweennodesCandD.
Twonewchordlinksareadded,withweightsof0.6and0.8.
A newly inserted node may establish new chord links with other nodes by removing some exist-
ing chord links. An existing chord link is removed when it has higher weight than the added new
links. In Figure 8.21(d), a new node F is inserted between nodes A and D. Two new chord links
areaddedtoconnectFwithnodesBandEreplacingtheoldlinkbetweenBandEinFigure8.21(c).
The newly added chord links must have lower weights than those of the links being replaced. The
overlayisdynamicallyadaptedbyreplacinghigher-weightchordlinkswithlowerones,withoutchan-
ginganynode’sdegrees.
In Figure 8.21(e), the links between B and D, A and E in Figure 8.21(d) are replaced with two
new lower-weight links between A and D, B and E. Figure 8.21(f) shows the overlay after the
departure of node E in Figure 8.21(d). The links associated with E are removed. The base ring is
always connected as nodes keep their correct successors. To improve the connectivity, the CRP bor-
rows the idea of the successor list from Chord. Each node maintains a list of OðlognÞ successor


===== page 536 =====
8.3 Routing, Proximity, and Fault Tolerance 513
A B B
1 1
1 1 1 1
0.7 0.6
A C
A 0.7 C
1 0.8
1
C
1 1
D E
1 1
D
(a) Initial network (b) After D joining (c) After E joining
B B B
A 1 1 C A 1 1 C A 1 1 C
0.3 0.7 0.3 0.6 0.3
0.8 1 1
1 0.5 1 0.3 0.5 1 0.3 1
F 1 1 E F 1 1 E F D
1
D D
(d) After F joining (e) After link adjustment (f) After E departure
FIGURE8.21
AnexampleCRP-enabledoverlaynetworkdesigninsixsteps.
(CourtesyofLi,Xie,Hwang,andLi[24])
nodes down the base ring. If a node detects a faulty successor, it replaces that successor with the
firstlivenodeinthelist.InFigure8.21(e),forexample,nodeCkeepstwosuccessornodesEandD.
IfnodeEfailsorleaves,CtakesDasitsnewsuccessor.
8.3.4.3 Performance of CRP Scheme
Figure 8.22 depicts the relative performances of CRP and four other tree-based algorithms. The
notation CRP:q denotes a CRP system with a message replication ratio q. CAM-Chord [56] builds
on Chord overlays. It takes the heterogeneity of node capacities into account. ACOM [9] imple-
ments data dissemination by combining scope-limited flooding and random walks on overlay net-
works. GoCast [47] and Plumtree [23] apply a tree-based gossip scheme for data dissemination. It
can be found that CRP outperforms all other designs in terms of delivery time due to proximity
awareness. The message replication in CRP is close to 0 and can be controlled by adjusting q.
The CRP-enabled overlay networks consider both network proximity and capacity proximity. It
uses a hybridization of scope flooding and tree traversing to disseminate data promptly. The overlay
networks provide redundant proximity links for tree structures for fault resilience. The churn-
resilient CRP-enabled overlay networks provide adequate backup links for the tree structure. Once a
node x receives a departure notification from its parent or detects the failure of its parent by heart-
beat messages, it actively switches its tree parent. The node x prefers its proximity chord neighbor
as the new parent to save on delivery time.


===== page 537 =====
300
200
2000 6000 10000 14000 18000
Number of nodes
8.4 TRUST, REPUTATION, AND SECURITY MANAGEMENT
The anonymous and dynamic nature of peer activities makes P2P networks very vulnerable to
abuses by selfish and malicious peers. For example, most P2P file-sharing networks (e.g., Gnutella)
consist of autonomous peers with special self-interests. There is no efficient way to prevent mali-
cious peers from joining open networks. To encourage resource sharing among peers and combat
malicious peer behavior, trust and reputation management becomes critical to maintain the normal
operation of P2P networks.
Without trust, peers will have little incentive to contribute their resources to other peers. The
peers may hesitate to interact with unknown peers due to the concern of receiving corrupted or poi-
soned files or being exploited by malware. Identifying trustworthy peers demands reputation sys-
tems in commercial P2P applications, such as for online shopping, auctioning, content delivery,
pay-per-transaction, etc.
8.4.1 Peer Trust and Reputation Systems
This section characterizes the trust model needed to establish harmony among the peers. We will
define trust matrix for aggregating peer reputations in P2P reputation system development.
8.4.1.1 Peer Trust Characteristics
There are two ways to model the trust or distrust among peers: namely trust and reputation. Trust
refers to the belief of one peer on another, based on his direct experiences with the peer. Reputation
is a collective opinion on a peer by other peers based on recommendations. To face the reality of an
open P2P network, one has to assume that the participating peers in a P2P system do not trust one
another unless proven otherwise.
)sm(
yaled
yreviled
.gvA
514 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
CAM-Chord
700
ACOM
CRP: 0
600 CRP: 0.01
GoCast
Plumtree
500
400
FIGURE 8.22
AveragedeliverytimeoffivedatadisseminationschemesoveraP2Pnetwork.
(CourtesyofZ.Li,etal.[24])


===== page 538 =====
8.4 Trust, Reputation, and Security Management 515
A fair reputation system is thus needed to establish the trust or distrust among peers, based on
recorded historical behaviors of the peers. The purpose is to distinguish good peers from bad ones
through a scientific screening process. The quality of the reputation system is primarily indicated by
its accuracy and effectiveness in updating periodically.
8.4.1.2 Trust Matrix for Computing Reputations
Consider an overlay network for global reputation aggregation in a P2P system over five peers,
denoted by nodes N1, N2,…, N5 of a directed graph shown in Figure 8.23. The trust relationships
among the peers are represented by a square trust matrix M(t)=[m (t)], where m (t) is the local
ij ij
score issued by node iin evaluating node j at time t. All trust scores are fractions in the range (0, 1)
with 0 meaning no trust (or no contact) and 1 for 100 percent trust. Therefore, trust is relatively
measured by these fractions. For the five-node network, the following trust matrix at certain time t
is achieved. Note that all row sums are 1. A zero entry, m (t) = 0, means node i does not evaluate
ij
node j for lack of direct contact. The diagonal scores are all zero, meaning no peer evaluates
himself.
2 3
0 0 0 0:2 0:8
6 60:6 0 0 0 0:4 7 7
MðtÞ=6 6 0 0:7 0 0 0:3 7 7 (8.2)
4 5
0 0 0 0 0
0:9 0 0 0:1 0
The edge labels are the local scores issued between all (source, destination) pairs. The frac-
tion value inside each node in Figure 8.23 is the global reputation score of that peer at time t.
This global score is resulted from aggregating all local scores issued by all peers toward the peer
being evaluated. However, all local scores must be weighted by their own global reputations.
In another words, the global reputation is the weighted sum of all local scores. For clarity, all
the global reputation scores are normalized so that their sum is always a “1”. For example, the
Global N2 0.001
0.7 N3
0.6
0.009
0.4
0.32 0.2 0.3
N1
0.8
0.9 0.04
N4
0.1
0.63
N5
FIGURE8.23
AdirectedgraphshowingthetrustrelationshipamongfivepeersinaP2Pnetwork.


===== page 539 =====
516 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
global scores of the five peers are represented by a reputation vector of five components which
add up to 1.
VðtÞ=fv ðtÞ,v ðtÞ,v ðtÞ,v ðtÞ,v ðtÞg=f0:32,0:001,0:009,0:04,0:63g (8.3)
1 2 3 4 5
8.4.1.3 Reputation Systems
A reputation system calculates the global reputation score of a peer by considering the opinions
(i.e., feedback) from all other peers that have interacted with this peer. After a peer completes a
transaction(e.g., downloading a music file), the peer will provide his feedback for other peers to use
in future transactions. By making the reputation scores publicly available, peers are able to make
informed decisions about which peers to trust.
The eBay reputation system is a simple and successful one, since it has a centralized authority to
manage all user feedback scores. However, in an open and decentralized P2P system, peers will not
have any centralized authority to maintain and distribute reputation information. Instead, most exist-
ing P2P reputation systems calculate global reputation scores by aggregating peer feedback in a
fully distributed manner. Building an efficient P2P reputation system is a challenging task due to
several intrinsic requirements of large-scale P2P systems.
To measure peer reputations, one can set up an evaluation system. After each transaction, the
two participant parties evaluate each other by giving an honest score. This is like what we do in
online auction systems such as eBay. Each peer’s reputation can be retrieved from the voting sys-
tem. However, not every peer is trustworthy. The scores from malicious peers are useless, while the
scores from more trustworthy peers are more useful. This advises us to assign different weights to
votes based on the voting peers’ reputations. It should be noted that a peer’s reputation may be dif-
ferent from other peers. The reputations can be expressed with a reputation matrix.
8.4.1.4 Global Reputation Aggregation
As global reputation scores are aggregated from local feedback, the distribution property of feed-
back plays a significant role in the design of an efficient reputation system. Surprisingly, most pre-
vious work either ignored the distribution of peer feedback or assumed an arbitrary random
distribution, which could be misleading. To achieve global reputation scores, each peer calculates
its own parts and all peers cooperatively compute a global matrix. For example, at time t+1, the
global reputation score of node N5 is computed as follows:
v ðt+1Þ=m ðtÞ×v ðtÞ+m ðtÞ×v ðtÞ+m ðtÞ×v ðtÞ
5 15 1 25 2 35 3
(8.4)
=0:8×0:32+0:4×0:001+0:3×0:009=0:2573
Similarly, the remaining global scores for the other four peers are computed to yield the following
updatedglobalreputationvector:
Vðt+1Þ=fv ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þg
1 2 3 4 5
(8.5)
=f0:5673,0:0063,0,0:1370,0:2573g
This vector is unnormalized. Dividing each peer score by the total sum of all component scores,
one can obtain the following normalized global reputation vector. Note that the sum of the five
peer reputation scores should be 1 in the normalized vector.


===== page 540 =====
8.4 Trust, Reputation, and Security Management 517
Vðt+1Þ=fv ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þ,v ðt+1Þg
1 2 3 4 5
(8.6)
=f0:5862,0:0065,0,0:1416,0:2657g
8.4.1.5 Design Objectives of Reputation Systems
The following six key issues should be addressed in the design of a cost-effective P2P reputation
system:
(cid:129) High accuracy To help distinguish reputable peers from malicious ones, the system should
calculate the reputation scores as close to their real trustworthiness as possible.
(cid:129) Fast convergence speed The reputation of a peer varies over time. The reputation aggregation
should converge fast enough to reflect the true changes of peer behaviors.
(cid:129) Low overhead The system should only consume limited computation and bandwidth resources
for peer reputation monitoring and evaluation.
(cid:129) Adaptive to peer dynamics A peer joins and leaves an open P2P system dynamically. The
system should adapt to these peer dynamics instead of relying on predetermined peers.
(cid:129) Robust to malicious peers The system should be robust to various attacks by both independent
and collective malicious peers.
(cid:129) Scalability The system should be able to scale to serve a large number of peers in terms of
accuracy, convergence speed, and extra overhead per peer.
8.4.1.6 Three Representative Reputation Systems
The PeerTrust system [53] was developed at Georgia Institute of Technology. The system computes
the reputation score of a given peer as the average feedback weighted by the scores of the origina-
tors. Five trust attributes were suggested in this system. The EigenTrust system was developed at
Stanford University [20], which aggregates reputation information using the eigenvector of the trust
matrix over the peers. EigenTrust relies on a good choice of some pretrusted peers. This assumption
may be overly optimistic in a distributed computing environment because the pretrusted peers may
change with time. The PowerTrust reputation system [57] was developed at the University of South-
ern California. PowerTrust will be covered in Section 8.4.3. Table 8.5 compares these three systems
in four technical aspects.
8.4.2 Trust Overlay and DHT Implementation
This section introduces a trust overlay concept for fast aggregation of trust information in global
reputation calculations. Then a DHT implementation of the reputation system is described.
8.4.2.1 Trust Overlay Network (TON)
This is a virtual network on top of a P2P system. A TON is represented by a directed graph in
Figure 8.24. The graph nodes correspond to the peers. The directed edges or links are labeled with
the feedback scores between two interacting peers. The feedback score is issued by a peer (source
of the link) for the service provided by the interacting peer (destination of the link). For example,
node N after downloading music files from nodes N and N issues the feedback scores, 0.7 and
5 2 7
0.3, to the two provider nodes, respectively. If a node gets more than one service from the same
provider, this consumer generates a newly updated score after each transaction.


===== page 541 =====
518 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Table 8.5 Comparison of ThreeP2PReputation Systems
Global Scalability
Reputation LocalTrust Reputation Implementation and
System Evaluation Aggregation Overhead Reliability
EigenTrustat Usessumof Usespretrust Moderateoverhead Limited
Stanford positiveand peerstocompute experiencedinassigning scalabilityand
University[20] negative globalscoresfrom scoremanagersandin reliabilityif
ratings trustmatrix messagingforglobalscore pretrustpeers
aggregation leave
PeerTrustat Normalized Peercalculates Moderateoverhead Partially
GeorgiaTech ratingoneach trustscoreover experiencedinglobalscore scalableand
[53] transaction fivefactorsina calculationoverfivefactors resistantto
distributedmanner andontheestablishmentof malicious
thetrustmanager peers
PowerTrust UsesBayesian Distributedranking Lowoverheadinusing Highly
atUSC[57] methodto ofpowernodes locality-preservinghashing scalableand
generatelocal andLWRstrategy tolocatepowernodes. robustwith
trustscores toaggregate Globalaggregationtime dynamicpeer
globalreputation dropssharplywithlook- joinandleave
scores aheadrandomwalk andmalicious
strategyapplied peers
Trust overlay network (TON)
0.6 N 3 0.6 0.2 N 200
N 2 Aggregate 0.7 0.9 0.3 N 7 N 10,000
0.8 N 0.1
0.4 N N 15 N 99
1 5
N
4
Underlying P2P network
FIGURE 8.24
AtrustoverlaynetworkforaP2Ptrustmanagment,wheretheedgeisweightedbythepeerfeedbackscore
fortheserviceprovided.Theglobalreputationofapeer(node)iscalculatedbytheweightedsumofalllocal
trustscoresreceivedontheincomingedges.
(CourtesyofR.ZhouandK.Hwang[57])
Our system can incorporate different methods to generate feedback scores, such as Bayesian
learning. In a TON, every node keeps feedback scores for its neighbors. Because every peer has its
own criteria to generate feedback scores, the feedback will be normalized to local trust scores.
Each node N is rated with a global reputation score v. This global reputation is aggregated from
i i


===== page 542 =====
8.4 Trust, Reputation, and Security Management 519
local trust scores weighted by the global reputations of all in-degree neighbors. For example, the
global reputation score of N could be calculated by weighting three incoming local scores (0.8,
2
0.7, 0.6) from N , N , and N , respectively: v =0.8 v +0.7 v +0.6 v . Given v =0.04,
1 5 10,000 2 1 5 10000 1
v =0.0007, and v =0.000005, then v =0.8×0.04+0.7×0.0007+0.6×0.0000005=0.032+
5 10000 2
0.00049+0.00003=0.032493. It is interesting to note that node N has a much higher reputation
1
score v , compared with v and v in this example. Thus, node N carries more weight in the
1 5 10000 1
global reputation aggregation process.
8.4.2.2 DHT Implementation
Basically, distributed reputation ranking requires two different hash overlays. One assigns peers to
their score managers and the other ranks the peers by their global reputation scores. Figure 8.25
presents a five-node system built on top of a chord with a 4-bit circular hash space. Node N is
15
the score manager of node N whose global reputation is 0.2. Node N hashes the reputation value
2 15
0.2 using a simple LPH function H(x)=32x. The resultant hash value is 6.4. Node N sends out
15
Sort_Request{ key=6.4, (0.2, N , N ) } message, which is routed to node N . Node N stores the
2 15 8 8
triplet (0.2, N , N ), since it is the successor node of hash value 6.4.
2 15
<0.40, N , N > 0/16
8 12
<0.02, N , N >
12 8
<0.20, N >
2
<0.10, N >
6
Node E (N
S o
1
rt
5
_r
)
eq
T
u
o
es
p
t
_
(k
M
ey
_
=
request(m=1,
k=0)Node A (N 2 )
0.64,
<
0.02,
N
<0.28, N
15
, N
6
> 12,
N
8> )
,
N8 >)
<0.40, N
8
>
=0.64,
<0.02,
N12
<0.10, N
6
, N
2
>
Node D (N
12
)
Sort_request
(key
<0.28, N
15
>
Node B (N )
6
<0.02, N >
12
<0.20, N , N >
2 15 Node C (N )
8
FIGURE8.25
Distributedreputationrankingusingthelocality-preserving hashfunctionoveraDHT-basedP2Psystem.
(CourtesyofR.ZhouandK.Hwang[57])


===== page 543 =====
520 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Node N is the successor node of the maximum hash value 15, so node N initiates the process
2 2
to find m power nodes. Node N is responsible for the hash values in the union of two ranges [15,
2
16] ∪ [0, 2]. Since it has no corresponding triplets within the range [15, 16], it stores zero triples
with the highest reputation values, that is, k=0. Therefore, it sends a Top_m_Request(m=1, k=0)
message to its predecessor node N , which finds its stored triplet with value 0.4 being the highest
15
one. So, node N is the most reputable node in this example system. Multiple LPH functions could
8
be used to prevent cheating by the malicious peers.
8.4.3 PowerTrust: A Scalable Reputation System
Figure8.26shows themajorbuildingblocksina PowerTrustsystem.First,aTON isbuilton topof
allpeers(nodes)inaP2Psystem.Allpeersevaluateoneanother,wheneveratransactiontakesplace
between a peer pair. Therefore, all peers send local trust scores to one another frequently. These
scores are considered the raw data input to the PowerTrust system. The system aggregates the local
scores to calculate the global reputation score of each participating peer. All global scores form a
reputation vector, V = (v , v , v , …, v ), which is the output of the PowerTrust system. All global
1 2 3 n
scoresarenormalizedwithΣ v =1,wherei=1,2,…,nandnistheTONnetworksize.
i i
The system is built with five functional modules, as shown in Figure 8.26. The regular random
walk module supports initial reputation aggregation. The look-ahead random walk (LRW) module
is used to update the reputation score periodically. To this end, the LRW also works with a distrib-
uted ranking module to identify the power nodes. The system leverages the power nodes to update
the global scores’ reputation. PowerTrust achieves high aggregation speed and accuracy, robustness
to resist malicious peers, and high scalability to support large-scale P2P applications.
8.4.3.1 Reputation Convergence Overhead
The convergence overhead is measured as the number of iterations before the global reputation con-
vergence. Convergence means the distance between two consecutive reputation vectors is smaller
Global reputation scores V
ν ν ν ... ... ... ... ν
1 2 3 n
Power
Initial reputation
Reputation updating nodes
aggregation
Regular random walk Look-ahead random walk Distributed ranking module
Local trust scores
Trust overlay network
FIGURE 8.26
FunctionalmodulesinthePowerTrustsystemfortrustscorecollectionandglobalreputationaggregation.
(CourtesyofZhouandHwang[57])


===== page 544 =====
300
200
100
0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Greedy factor (α)
than the threshold. The EigenTrust approach relies on a few pretrusted nodes to compute the global
reputations. They assumed that some peers are known to be trustworthy, essentially among the very
first few peers joining the system.
For fairness, the same number of power nodes equal to that of the pretrusted nodes used in
EigenTrust is chosen. Figure 8.27 shows the convergence overheads for these two reputation sys-
tems. Here, the power nodes in PowerTrust and the pretrusted node in EigenTrust are allowed to
leave freely. A sharp drop in iteration count in using PowerTrust to a flat small number less than
50 is observed, when α increases from 0.15 to 1, while EigenTrust still requires more than
100 iterations to converge. The EigenTrust system overhead can reach as high as 400 iterations as
the system increases to 4,000 nodes.
The EigenTrust system converges very slowly. The system cannot guarantee its convergence,
when the pretrusted nodes are allowed to leave the system freely. In the PowerTrust system, the
power nodes are reelected after each aggregation round. Based on the distributed ranking mechan-
ism, the score managers of the departing power nodes notify the system to replace them in a timely
manner with other, more qualified power nodes. The decrease in computation overhead means a sig-
nificant traffic reduction on the network, and less work for all peers involved. The low overhead in
using the PowerTrust system makes it attractive for performing highly scalable P2P applications.
8.4.3.2 Query Success Rate
The PowerTrust system was applied in simulated P2P file-sharing experiments. There are more than
100,000 files in the simulated P2P systems. The number of copies of each file in the system is
determined by a content Power-law distribution with β = 1.2. Each peer is assigned with a number
daehrevo
ecnegrevnoC
8.4 Trust, Reputation, and Security Management 521
500
EigenTrust
PowerTrust
400
FIGURE8.27
ConvergenceoverheadoftworeputationsystemsinaP2Pnetwork.
(CourtesyofZhouandHwang[57])


===== page 545 =====
NoTrust
1
of files based on Sarioiu distribution. At each time step, a query is randomly generated at a peer
and completely executed before the next query/time step. The query distribution determines which
file each query searches for. The queries are ranked according to their popularity. A Power-law dis-
tribution with β = 0.63 for queries ranked 1 to 250 and β=1.24 for the remaining lower ranking
queries is used. This distribution models the query popularity in existing P2P systems. When a
query for a file is issued, the file owner with the highest global reputation is selected to download
the desired file.
Thequerysuccessrateismeasuredbythepercentageofsuccessfulqueriesoverthetotalnumber
ofqueriesissued.Everynodemayrespondtoaquerywithunauthenticfiles.Forsimplicity,thisbeha-
vior is modeled as inversely proportional to the node’s global reputation. Both cases of allowing or
disallowing power nodes or pretrusted nodes to leave the system are considered. The case of a
no-trustsystem,meaningnotrustmanagementintheP2Psystem,isalsoevaluated.Theno-trustsys-
temrandomlyselectsanodetodownloadthefilewithoutconsideringreputation. Figure8.28shows
theresultswithoutthedepartureofpowernodesorpretrustednodes.
There are 1,000 queries issued after each round of global reputation aggregation. The query suc-
cess rate of PowerTrust is maintained at 90 percent after just one round of reputation aggregation.
The query success rate of EigenTrust drops from 85 percent to 50 percent after several aggregation
rounds. This is because the pretrusted nodes may leave the system randomly. The EigenTrust query
success rate drops to a 50 percent low, equal to that of a no-trust system, after 17 rounds of reputa-
tion aggregation.
8.4.4 Securing Overlays to Prevent DDoS Attacks
The security of a P2P network may be in doubt if the peer nodes behave maliciously to attack other
innocent peer machines. The attackers could be hidden in the P2P group. They can view or modify
packet routing or can collude with other peers to stage the attacks or to steal the contents. What can
)%(
etar
sseccus
yreuQ
522 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
EigenTrust PowerTrust
80
60
40
20
0
5 9 13 17
Round number (t)
FIGURE 8.28
Querysuccessrateindistributedfilesharingusingtworeputationsystemstocompensateforthefree
departureofpowernodesorpretrustedpeers.
(CourtesyofZhouandHwang[57])


===== page 546 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 523
be done to hinder the attacks is crucial to achieve harmonious operation in a P2P network. Four
classes of network attacks often occur in a P2P network:
1. A P2P network could enter churn condition, if large number of peers join or leave the network
rapidly or randomly. Churn could create inconsistent behavior or resources deadlocks.
2. Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks are caused by flooding attacks on a target node.
3. Routingattackersattempttore-routemessagesinordertostealcontentsortostageDDoSattacks.
4. Storage/retrieval attacks are caused by attackers to prevent the delivery of the requested data.
To becomeresilienttonetworkchurns,onecanforcenodestosignallmessagessothatinconsis-
tencycaneasilydetected.Tocope withDDoSattacks,onecanreplicatethecontentandspread over
the network. The SOS example below presents a more sophisticated solution. For identity spoofing
attackscausedbyapeernodetouseothernode’sidentityortodeliverboguscontents.Onesolution
istoinsist thatall peersmust havecertificatessignedbyatrustedauthority.Anothersolutiontopre-
ventproofingistyingtheidentitywithprotectedIPaddressorsendquerytoverifytheaddress.
To prevent routing attacks, one solution is to use a converging policy iteratively so that each
hop moves closer to the destination in the ID space. Another solution is to provide multiple paths
to re-route messages around the attackers. Onion routing is also used to hide the identify of the ori-
ginator of the final destination. This done by encryption of the incoming message and the next hop
information recursively using public keys. This way, any node only knows who was the immediate
sender and who is the next receiver. To combat storage/retrieval attacks, one can replicate the data
object to enhance availability.
Example 8.14 SOS Scheme to Prevent DDoS Attacks [21]
SOS is an architecture for Secure Overlay Services, which was proposed by Keromyts, et al. [21] in 2002.
The main goal of SOS to allow a majority of legitimate or authenticated users to communicate with a
secure checkpoint node, where DDoS attacks can be stopped to be forwarded to the final target machine.
This is made possible by making the target address difficult to replicate or legitimate users may be mobile
using changing IP addresses. Good examples of SOS include FBI, police or bank officers, who always
checkwith their centraldatabase.
A SOS system will protect legitimate users and innocent target machines from DDoS attacks. At the
same time, the attackers are blocked or caught. To this end, we need to screen good users into a pre-
approved class. Attackers should not allowed to attack a bound number of distributed end systems. The
construction of an SOS system requires to perform filtering, to hide the proxy as secret servlets, to build
reliable overlays with hidden proxies, and to advertise the trustworthy access points for users to join the
P2P system. The SOS can be also assisted by using the Chord with SOAP servers or adding redundancy
in SOAPservers. Moredetails onthe effectiveness ofSOS preventingDDoS attacks canbefound in[21].
8.5 P2P FILE SHARING AND COPYRIGHT PROTECTION
P2P technology enables files to be shared among peers in a distributed way freely. The client first
performs search operations to locate peers holding the files the client wants. The client downloads
the files directly from these provider nodes. The ultimate goal is to deliver content to all requesters


===== page 547 =====
524 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
as fast as possible. Caching of P2P content is helpful to improve content downloading speed and
traffic locality. This section reviews fast file search methods. Replicas and consistency techniques
to enhance delivery speed and success rate are discussed as well.
8.5.1 Fast Search, Replica, and Consistency
For P2P file-sharing applications, search algorithms play the most import role. A search algorithm
determines which nodes hold the specified files. The performance of a search algorithm is evaluated
by two metrics: query path length and message overhead. Query path length is measured by the
average number of nodes a query message traverses before reaching the destination, while message
overhead is measured by the average number of query messages forwarded for one search
operation.
Search algorithms for file-sharing applications based on structured P2P overlays and unstruc-
tured P2P overlays are different. In a structured P2P overlay application, keys of data objects and
nodes are mapped to the same identifier space and the data object information is stored on the node
that holds the identifier zone within which the key is mapped. Search algorithms are like routing
algorithms in overlay networks. In an unstructured P2P overlay application, however, each node
often only holds the information of the data objects that it shares. The query message has to tra-
verse a lot of nodes until it reaches the destination. In the following paragraphs, we discuss algo-
rithms for structured and unstructured P2P overlay applications.
In structured P2P overlay networks, each node is responsible for a portion of the identifier
space. For example, in Chord, a node is responsible for the range from its predecessor to the node
on the ring identifier space. The information of the data objects whose keys are mapped to the iden-
tifier range held by node x is stored on x. Node x is called the successor of the key. Searching a key
is equal to routing the query message to the successor of the key. Hence, the performance of search
algorithms is similar to that of routing algorithms, which means a key is always located in O(log n)
hops with the overhead of O(log n) messages, where n is the number of nodes in the application.
Search in applications based on unstructured P2P overlay networks is more complicated. Basi-
cally, the search algorithms can be classified as blind search and informed search. Blind search
algorithms are for applications where nodes do not maintain the metadata of files shared by others,
while informed search algorithms are for applications where nodes store some information of the
files shared by others to facilitate the search. Blind search algorithms are often referred to as flood-
ing algorithms.
In flooding algorithms, when a query message is first received, a node forwards it to k randomly
selected neighbors, until the TTL of the message shrinks to 0. The query messages are forwarded
round by round like a wave spreading from the source. Flooding algorithms inevitably bring consid-
erable message overhead. A simple method to reduce overhead is to limit the TTLs of query mes-
sages. However, this would increase the probability that objects far away from the query nodes
cannot be located. Various algorithms have been proposed to reduce message overhead, such as
expanding ring and random walk.
In expanding ring algorithms, a query node is associated with a schedule ft
1
,t
2
,:::,t ig: Initially,
the TTL of a query message is set to t by the query node. If the query cannot be satisfied, the
1
TTL grows to t . Eventually, the TTL grows to the maximum value t. The successive retries facili-
2 i
tate overhead reduction at the cost of a slight increase in query path length.


===== page 548 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 525
Random walk algorithms reduce overhead from another aspect. A query node deploys k
independentlyrandomwalkers.Eachwalkercarriesaquerymessageandwalksontheoverlaygraph,
until the desired object is located. Random walk algorithms suffer from the TTL selection problem
justlikefloodingalgorithmsdo.However,inrandomwalkalgorithms,eachroundonlyincreasesthe
number of visited nodes by k. Therefore, it is reasonable for walkers to periodically check with the
querynodetodeterminewhethertocontinueorstop.Randomwalkalgorithmsgenerallyoutperform
expanding ring algorithms and save on message overhead by two orders of magnitude at a cost of a
slightlyincreaseinquerypathlengthcomparedtofloodingalgorithms.
The principles of scalable blind search algorithms for unstructured P2P overlays are summarized
as follows. First, the algorithms should adopt adaptive termination. Simply limiting the TTL values
does not work well as that would adversely affect search scope. Second, the number of visited
nodes should grow slowly with the increase in search round. This is because only a small portion
of the nodes are required to be visited. If the number of visited nodes grows quickly (e.g., exponen-
tially in flooding algorithms), most of the messages generated at the last several hops are duplicated.
The message overhead incurred by blind search algorithms can be greatly reduced if nodes keep
some information regarding the files shared by others. Informed search algorithms are designed for
this purpose. Each node keeps some information regarding the files shared by others and the infor-
mation is used to guide the forwarding of query messages. The idle case is that each node keeps all
the files shared by others, and thus the query path is only one hop long. However, this is not feasi-
ble because it requires not only unaffordable storage, but also lots of synchronize overhead among
peers.
Search performance can also be enhanced through overlay topology adaptation. In Gnutella, one
can take heterogeneity of node capacity into account by assigning more loads on high-capacity
nodes. High-capacity nodes adaptively build more overlay links and keep the file indices of the
nodes one hop away. Since random walk is biased toward the high-degree node, most queries are
forwarded to the high-capacity nodes and satisfied there. Another topology adaptation is to consider
semantic interests of nodes. Semantically relevant nodes are organized into the same semantic clus-
ters on overlays. Queries are forwarded to semantically relevant clusters for answers. The idea
behind this is that if nodes are semantically relevant, it is likely that they are relevant to the same
queries. BitTorrent is the most popular P2P content distribution application. It uses swarming con-
tent distribution.
Example 8.15 BitTorrent File-Sharing Network
BitTorrent is a P2Pcontent distribution protocolthat is widely used in the currentInternet. It is reportedby
Ipoque that BitTorrent content distribution systems account for 27 percent to 55 percent of Internet traffic.
A BitTorrent system leverages the upload bandwidth of participant peers to achieve high system capacity.
The nodes downloading the same file constitute a torrent. There is no communication between different
torrents. AtypicalBitTorrent systemconsists of four components asshowninFigure8.29.
Seeds are the nodes that have already downloaded the whole file. There is at least one initial seed in
the system at startup. A node that has not gotten the whole file is called a downloader. The tracker
tracks the nodes’ information, including the address and download process information. The tracker also
knows the seeds in the system. The web server hosts the torrent file, which stores the metadata of the file
to bedistributed andthe tracker’sinformation.


===== page 549 =====
526 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Web
e
T orr e
nt
fil
D P o e w e n rs lo i a n d fo p . roc. Tracker
3
Piece exchange 1 3
Downloader
1 4
2
1 4
1 2 3 4 File
Seed
FIGURE 8.29
TheBitTorrentsystemarchitecture.
(Courtesyof“BitTorrentProtocolSpecification”;www.bittorrent.org/protocol.html,2006)
Thefileisdivided intopiecesofequalsize,rangingfrom 32KB to4MB, withatypicalsizeof256KB.
The publisher of the file creates a hash for each piece using the SHA-1 hash function. The hash for each
piece is used to verify the integrity of the piece during downloading and is stored in the torrent file. A file
piece may be further divided into blocks. In this case, each piece is a trading unit, while a block is a
request unit. Only after all the blocks of a piece have been downloaded can this piece be publicly shared
with others.
A new node first gets the torrent file from a web site. By parsing the file, it gets the tracker’s address
and asks the tracker for peers’ information. Usually, the tracker responds with a peer list containing 50
randomly selected peers. The number of TCP connections initialized by a peer is limited to 35 and the
total number of connections of a peer is limited to 55. If ever a client fails to maintain at least 20 connec-
tions initialized by it, it recontacts the tracker to obtain additional peers. To update the tracker’s global
view of the system, active nodes periodically (every 30 minutes) report their states to the tracker or at the
time ofjoiningor departure.
Each peer has a bit-vector indicating the pieces’ availabilities on it, one bit for each piece. The bit-
vectors are exchanged between neighbors. If peer y’s neighbor x finds that y has a piece that it does not
have, x sends an “interest” message to y to request that piece. The decision by y of whether and when to
send the requested piece to x is based on an incentive strategy called Tit-for-Tat (TFT). All connections
are choked by default. Each peer periodically (every10 seconds) updates its download rates from all of its
neighbors, andchooses four neighbors.
The TFT is anincentive strategy to combat against free riders, the peers that contribute nothing or very
limited upload bandwidth. A peer also uses an optimistic unchoking strategy to unchoke a uniformly


===== page 550 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 527
chosen peerat random every 30seconds, which enables the nodes that haveno or verylimited file pieces
to start up.When unchoked bya neighboring peer, a node selects the file piece that is the least replicated
among its neighbors. This selection is called rarest first (RF) (locally) piece selection. However, for a new
peer that has no file piece, it randomly chooses a piece to download. The RF piece selection scheme is
used to enable random distribution of file pieces on overlay networks, which facilitates the diversities of
piecesonneighboringpeers.
Figure 8.30 shows the hierarchical structure of multiple swarms built up in a BitTorrent network.
Aswarmisacollectionofpeermachinesthatformavirtualclusterunderthecoordinationofspecialtrack-
ers. Interswarm traffic is possible if the local swarm cannot satisfy a user request. Multiple trackers
exchange updated directory information to the global view consistently. The idea is quite similar to that of
the KaZaA architecture shown in Figure 8.11. The purpose is to upgrade management efficiency and
shorten searchtimefor users.
Byconvention,the nameofa torrentfilehasthesuffix(.torrent). Torrentfileshavean“announce”sec-
tion,whichspecifiesthe URLofthetracker,andan“info”section,containingthe suggestednamesforthe
files, their lengths, the piece length used, and an SHA-1 hash code for each piece, all of which are used
Swarm
Tracker
Swarm
Swarm
Tracker
Swarm
FIGURE8.30
AnoperationalviewofaBitTorrentsystembuiltwithmultipleswarmsofresourcenodesunderthe
coordinationofspecialtrackers.


===== page 551 =====
528 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
by clients to verify the integrity of the data they receive. The tracker maintains lists of the clients currently
participating in the torrent. Alternatively, in a decentralized tracking which works without a tracker, every
peer acts as a tracker. Azureus was the first BitTorrent client to implement such a system through the
DHT. An alternative and incompatible DHT system, known as Mainline DHT, was later developed and
adopted byBitTorrent, µTorrent, and others.
8.5.1.1 Replica and Consistency
Replication is critical to improving search performance in P2P file-sharing applications. The number
of replicas for an object is affected by the popularity of that object. Intuitively, more replicas should
be created for highly popular objects. The number of nodes that hold the desired objects has a direct
impact on search performance. This is quite intuitive in that as a greater number of desired objects
scatter over the overlays, it becomes easier to find them.
A question related to replication concerns maintaining consistency of replicas. If the data object
is modified or updated by a replica node (i.e., the node maintains a replica of the object), the
updated content should be propagated to all the other replica nodes. Consistency maintenance
schemes provide support for applications dealing with frequently updated contents. Two key issues
of consistency maintenance concern how to track the replicas of an object and how to propagate the
updated contents to the replica nodes. The centralized scheme dedicates one node (often the root
node of the object) to keep the information of all the replica nodes and relies on this node to for-
ward the updated content. However, it lacks scalability.
In the locality-aware and distributed consistency maintenance scheme [25], the nodes that store the
replicas of an object constitute a replica group. The centralized scheme is sufficient for the replica
group with fewer replica nodes. Thus, our focus is on larger replica groups; for example, replica
groups of popular objects. An auxiliary hierarchical overlay network is established for each
replica group: The upper layer is DHT-based and consists of powerful and stable replica nodes of the
key, and the ordinary replica nodes at the second layer attach to physically close upper-layer nodes.
Figure 8.31 shows the structure, where the upper layer is based on a Chord ring structure.
When an updated replica emerges on a node, the corresponding upper-layer node dynamically
initializesad-arysource-specifictreeontopoftheupperlayerbycontinuouslypartitioningtheDHT
identifierspace.Supposeupper-layerreplicanodexreceivesanupdaterequestfromoneoftheordin-
ary replica nodes that attaches to it. Initially, node x holds the whole identifier space represented by
the Chord ring structure. It divides the identifier space into d equal parts. The first node along the
clockwisedirection withineach partisselectedasthe representativenode ofthatpart. All therepre-
sentative nodes constitute the root nodex’s child node set. Each identifier part is further partitioned
intodsubpartsofequalsize,andsoon,untilthereisonlyonereplicanodeintheidentifierpart.
The updated content is propagated along the tree structure in a top-down fashion and the upper-
layer replica node takes charge of forwarding the updated content to the ordinary replica nodes that
attach to it. Since the upper-layer node and the ordinary replica nodes that attach to it are physically
close, the updated contents are transferred quickly and network bandwidth consumption is greatly
reduced. The tree structure is destroyed from bottom to top after the update operation completes, in
order to save on maintenance overhead. Now, let’s briefly analyze the time (measured by logical
hops on the overlays) and the control overhead required by an update operation.


===== page 552 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 529
Physically close
Chord ring
Chord replica nodes
Ordinary replica nodes
FIGURE8.31
Auxiliarystructureforareplicagroup.
8.5.2 P2P Content Delivery Networks
This section applies P2P technology to digital content networking and distribution. First, three gen-
erations of content delivery networks (CDNs) are reviewed. Then we discuss how P2P technology
can enhance the QoS of CDNs.
8.5.2.1 Three Generations of CDNs
Table 8.6 compares three generations of CDNs in the past 30 years. The early days of online distri-
bution systems follow the client/server architecture using FTP or HTTP services. This generation is
limited by the processing power of a single server. For distributing small files, this approach is still
acceptable. Good examples include the Apache, GetRight, and CuteFTP services. The second gen-
eration is marked by the use of multiple surrogate servers and large-scale distribution networks
mainly for video streaming and software distribution.
TheAkamaiCDNisagoodexampleofalarge-scaleCDNasillustratedinExample8.14.Finally,
the P2P file-sharing networks mark the appearance of the third generation of CDNs. BitTorrent and
eMule are good examples. P2P networks definitely are more cost-effective than the first two genera-
tions. However, severe abuses on copyright violations in P2P file-sharing systems have hindered the
useofopenP2Pnetworksforcommercialcontentdistribution.Wediscusstheonlinepiracyproblemin
thenexttwosubsections.Selectivecontentpoisoningposesapossiblesolutiontothisproblem.
Example 8.16 A Global Content Distribution Network
In 2004, more than 3,000 companies used CDNs. They spent more than $20 million monthly. CDN provi-
ders have doubled their revenue almost every year since then. In 2005, worldwide CDN revenue grew to
$450 million in the delivery of news, film, sports, music, and video content. Figure 8.32 shows the


===== page 553 =====
530 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Table 8.6 Three Generations of ContentDistribution Networks
System Network Download Content ExampleSystemsand
Generations Architecture Bandwidth Applications WebSites
Firstgeneration: Clientsaccess Limitedby Smallfileswith Apache(www.apache
client/server serverusing single-server limited .com/)GetRight(www
system FTPandHTTP bandwidth downloads .getright.com/)CuteFTP
(www.cuteftp.com/)
Second Clientsconnect Loadbalancing Video Akamai(www.akamai
generation: tomultiple amongservers streaming,virus .com/)SyncCast(www
CDNs servers signatures .synccast.com/)
Thirdgeneration: P2Poverlay Low;peersare Largefiles, BitTorrent(www
P2Pfile-sharing network notsecured speedisnot .bittorrent.org/)eDonkey
system andare critical (www.edonkey.com/)
unreliable eMule(www.emule.org/)
CourtesyofLouandHwang[31].
Origin server
Clients in in U.S.
Japan CDN
Surrogate CDN content
server in distributor Surrogate
Japan server in
China
Surrogate Surrogate
server in server in
Australia U.K.
Clients in
Australia Clients in
China
Content delivery network
Clients in overview
U.K.
FIGURE 8.32
TheconceptofaglobalCDNusingsurrogateserversinmajoruserregionsorcountries.
(CourtesyofPallisandVakali[37])
conceptual architecture of a global-scale CDN, modeled after the Akamai Technologies system. By 2006,
the Akamai CDN provided 80 percent of overall content delivery services. At that time, more than 12,000
surrogate serverswere usedin variouspartsof theworld inmorethan1,000 networks in62 countries.
This number is now much greater. Surrogate servers are used as cache centers for distributing digital
content more cost-effectively in terms of transmission, storage, access speed, and fault tolerance require-
ments. Each surrogate center is responsible for distributing the requested content to all end users in each
country orregion. TheCDN contentdistributioncentercoordinatesthe traffic amongthe servers. Forcopy-
right protection reasons,open P2Ptechnologyisnot used herefor commercialcontentdistribution.
[image text] FTP and HIT P
lents in


===== page 554 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 531
A P2P network does not require many expensive servers to deliver content. Instead, content is
distributed and shared among the peers. P2P networks feature improvements over conventional
CDNs in terms of content availability and system scalability. Electronic publishing was hindered by
the rapid growth of copyright violations. The major source of illegal P2P content distribution lies in
peer collusion to share copyrighted content with other peers or pirates.
Digital watermarking is often considered for digital copyright protection. Digital watermarking is
injected into a content file so that when a pirated copy is discovered, authorities can find the origin
of the piracy via a unique watermark in each copy. In a P2P network, all peers are sharing exactly
the same file (if it is not poisoned), which effectively defeats the purpose of watermarking. Thus,
watermarking is not a suitable technology for P2P file sharing. By subdividing a large file into
smaller chunks, P2P content delivery allows a peer to download multiple chunks from different
sources. File chunking increases availability and decreases download time. Table 8.7 summarizes
three major P2P CDN families.
P2P networks in the same family have some common features. They are variants or descendants
of their predecessors: BitTorrent, Gnutella, and eMule, respectively. These families are distinguished
primarily by the file-chunking or hashing protocols applied. At the time of this writing, none of
these P2P networks has been built with satisfactory support for copyright protection. The BitTorrent
family applies the strongest hashing at the individual piece or chunklevel, which is most resistant to
poisoning. The Gnutella family applies file-level hashing, which is easily poisoned. The eMule
family applies part-level hashing with fixed chunking.
OuranalyticalandexperimentalresultsshowthattheeMulefamilydemonstratesamoderatelevelof
resistance to content poisoning. The ability to detect and identify poisoned chunks is different in the
three P2Pnetworkfamilies.TheBitTorrentfamilykeeps clean chunks anddiscardspoisonedchunks.
Table 8.7 File Chunkingand HashingSchemesin P2PContentNetworks
P2PNetworks BitTorrentFamily GnutellaFamily eMuleFamily
ChunkingScheme Dividesfilesintofix- Peersnegotiatethechunk Dividesinto9,500KB
sizedchunks(256KB), sizeatruntime,64KB/chunk parts,eachhas53
calledpieces (180KB)chunks
HashDistribution SHAhashingatpiece SHAhashingappliedto MD-4hashingatpart
level,embeddedin entirefiletogeneratea level,peersexchange
indexfile uniquefileID,nochunk-level hashsettodetect
hashing corruptedcontents
PoisonResistance Poisondetectedat Poisondetectedonlyafter Poisondetectedatpart
piecelevel,eachis downloadingtheentirefile, level,worksifparthash
handledindependently heavyoverheadifpoisoned setisnotpoisoned
DownloadPolicy Keepscleanand Repeatsdownloadingentire Keepscleanand
discardspoisoned fileuntilallchunksareclean, discardspoisoned
pieces,repeats atime-consumingpolicy parts,downloadsuntil
downloaduntilall allpartsareclean
chunksareclean
ExampleNetworks BitTorrent,Snark, Gnutella,KaZaA,LimeWire, eMule,aMule,
BitComet,BNBT, Phex,Freenet,BareShare, Shareaza,iMule,
BitTyrant,Azureus, Swapper,Ares,etc. Morpheus,eDonkey,
JTorrent,etc. FastTrack,etc.


===== page 555 =====
532 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
TheGnutellafamilymustdownloadtheentirefilebeforeanypoisonedchunkscanbedetected.Because
ofpart-levelhashing,theeMulefamilywilleitherkeepordiscardtheentirepartof53chunks.
8.5.2.2 Content Delivery Methods
P2P content distribution applications take advantage of the abundant computing resources at the
edge networks to distribute content. Nodes which are interested in the same content form a P2P
overlay network. The data content is sent out from sources, stored, and forwarded among peers on
the overlay networks. Basically, there are three approaches to distributing data content: flooding-
based, tree-based, and swarm-based. In flooding-based approaches, data content is flooded on the
overlay networks. There are too many duplicated deliveries to be tolerated.
Thetree-basedapproachfollowsatreestructureanddeliversthecontentalongthetree.Sincepeer
nodesarelikelytojoin,leave,andevenfailatanytimeatwill,itisagreatchallengetomaintainthe
treestructure.Onecanalsobuildmultipletrees.Datacontentispartitionedintoseveralchunks.Each
chunkisdeliveredalongonetree.Anoderesidesatallthetreestogetthedataobjects.Multipletree-
basedapproachesenablefastcontentdeliveryandimprovethe robustnessofdatadistribution.How-
ever,vulnerabilitytonodechurnisstillthemostcriticalconcernforthiskindofapproach.
Swarm-based approaches are built on top of mesh overlay networks. They are also called data-
driven approaches. Data content is pulled by the participants, rather than distributed actively by the
data sources. Data content is also partitioned into small chunks. Each node keeps two “windows”
indicating what it has and which chunk it requires, respectively. Nodes periodically exchange their
“windows” with their neighbors and get the missing chunks actively.
Although swarming content distribution requires more time than the tree-based approach, it is
widely used and deployed in current applications (e.g., PPlive, BT, etc.) because of its scalability
and ease of implementation, among other features. The order of the chunks that a node gets is ran-
dom, that is, no specified schedule is imposed. This is reasonable for applications that do not care
about the arrival order of the chunks (e.g., BitTorrent). However, other applications require control
of orders (e.g., the live streaming applications). In these applications, a chunk must appear on a
node before its playback deadline, or it is useless. Basically, the rule for a node is to get the chunks
whose deadlines are approaching and the chunks which are rarely replicated among its neighbors.
Recently, P2P has become popular in the context of dynamic information dissemination. Nodes
that are interesting in the same event are organized in a P2P overlay network. Data items emerge at
nodes dynamically, which means the data sources are no longer fixed. Data items are replicated and
forwarded among peers. The delivery algorithms in this context are required to distribute the items
appearing in any node to all the others as soon as possible with relative small network resource
consumption. Swarm-based approaches are not suitable in this scenario because they suffer from a
delay-versus-overhead trade-off. That is, to minimize data delivery delay, the intervals of “window”
information exchange should be small.
However, this would increase control overhead. On the other hand, increasing the intervals
would prolong the delivery delay. Building one tree for each potential data source is also not a
good idea due to the considerable maintenance overhead involved. Building one undirected tree
structure for all the sources is optimal for controlling overhead. However, if the data source is a
leaf node, it would take as many as 2h hops to transmit the data item to all members, where h is
the height of tree. Another concern is how to maintain the tree structure under node churn.


===== page 556 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 533
8.5.3 Copyright Protection Issues and Solutions
P2Pnetworksarecost-effectiveindeliveringlargefilestomassivenumbersofusers.Unfortunately,
today’s P2P networksare grossly abused by illegal distributionofmusic,games, video streams,and
popularsoftware. These abuses have notonly resulted in heavy financiallossin the media and con-
tent industries, but also hindered the legal commercial use of P2P technology. The main sources of
illegal file sharing are peers who ignore copyright laws and collude with pirates. To solve this peer
collusionproblem,acopyright-compliantsystemforlegalizedP2Pcontentdeliveryisproposed[31].
ThegoalistostopcollusivepiracywithintheboundaryofaP2PCDN.Inparticular,thescheme
appealstoprotectinglarge-scaleperishablecontentsthatdiminishinvalueastimeelapses.Traditional
CDNs use a large number of surrogate content servers over many globally distributed WANs. The
contentdistributorsneedtoreplicateorcachecontentsonmanyservers.Thebandwidthdemandand
resources needed to maintain these CDNs are very expensive. A P2P content network significantly
reducesthedistributioncost,sincemanycontentserversareeliminatedandopennetworksareused.
P2Pnetworksimprovecontentavailability,asanypeercanserveasacontentprovider.P2Pnetworks
areinherentlyscalable,becausemoreprovidersleadtofastercontentdelivery.
Honest or legitimate clients are those that comply with the copyright law not to share contents
freely. Pirates are peers attempting to download some content file without paying or authorization.
The colluders are those paid clients who share the content with pirates. Pirates and colluders coexist
with law-abiding clients. Content poisoning is implemented by deliberate falsifying the file
requested by the pirate. The media industry backed by the Recording Industry Association of Amer-
ica (RIAA) and Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) has applied unscreened brute force
content poisoning to deter piracy in open P2P file-sharing networks. However, their prevention
results are mixed and controversial.
ThemediaindustryfightagainstallP2Pfile-sharingservicesbybruteforce.Legitimateclientscan
stillenjoytheflexibilityandconvenienceprovidedbyanopenP2Pnetwork.Theschemestopspirates
from downloading copyrighted files, even in the presence of colluding peers. A reputation scheme is
usedtodetectthesecolluders.Acopyright-protectedP2Pnetworkshouldbenefitboththemediaindus-
tryandInternetusercommunities[6].Figure8.33suggestsacopyright-protectedP2Pnetwork.Asori-
ginally developed by Lou and Hwang [31], the network is built over a large number of peers. Four
types of peers coexist in the P2P network: clients (honest or legitimate peers), colluders (paid peers
sharingcontentwithotherswithoutauthorization),distributionagents(trustedpeersoperatedbycontent
ownersforfiledistribution),andpirates(unpaidclientsdownloadingcontentfilesillegally).
To join the system, clients submit requests to a transaction server that handles purchasing and
billing matters. A private key generator (PKG) is installed to generate private keys with identity-
based signatures (IBSes) for securing communication among the peers. The PKG’s role is similar to
a certificate authority (CA) in PKI services. The difference lies in the fact that the CA generates the
public/private key pairs, while PKG only generates the private key.
The transaction server and PKG are only used initially when peers are joining the P2P network.
With IBS, the communication between peers does not require an explicit public key, because the
identity of each party is used as the public key. In our system, file distribution and copyright
protection are completely distributed. Based on past experience, the number of peers sharing
or requesting the same file at any point of time is in the hundreds. Depending on the variation of
the swarm size, only a handful of distribution agents are needed. For example, it is sufficient to use


===== page 557 =====
534 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Private key Transaction
generator server
sye
Purchase
K
Colluders
Clients
Distribution
agents P2P network: Pirates
Pirate identification
colluder detection
content delivery
proactive poisoning
FIGURE 8.33
AsecureP2Pplatformforcopyright-protectedcontentdelivery.
(CourtesyofLouandHwang[31])
Table 8.8 Mechanisms for Copyright Protection in P2PNetworks
Mechanism ProtocolRequirements
Securefileindexing FileindexformatismodifiedtoincludetokenandIBSsignature.
PAP Peersendsdigitalreceipttobootstrapagentandobtainsan
authorizationtoken.Thetokenmustberefreshedperiodically.
Proactivecontentpoisoning ThetokenandIBSsignaturecheckalldownloadrequestsand
responses,sendingcleanorpoisonedcontents,accordingly.
Randomcollusionprevention Distributionagentsrandomlyrecruitdecoystoprobeforcolluders.
Collusionreportsareweightedagainstclienttrustrates.
10 PC-based distribution agents to handle a swarm size of 2,000 peers. These agents authorize peers
to download and prevent piracy by unpaid peers.
Paid clients, colluders, and pirates are all mixed up without visible labels. The copyright-
protection network is designed to distinguish them automatically. Each client is assigned a bootstrap
agent, selected from one of the distribution agents, as its entry point. In current P2P networks, a
peer can self-assert its username without verification. Therefore, the peer endpoint address (IP
address + port number) instead of the username is used to identify a peer. A peer is considered
fully connected if it is reachable via a listening port on its host.
Table 8.8 summarizes the key protocols and mechanisms used to construct a trusted P2P system.
In this approach, the modified file index format enables pirate detection. Peer Authorization Proto-
col (PAP) authorizes legitimate download privileges to clients. The content distributor applies con-
tent poisoning to disrupt illegal file distribution to unpaid clients. The system is enhanced by
randomized collusion detection. In the system, a content file must be downloaded fully to be useful.
Such a restraint is easily achievable by compressing and encrypting the file with a trivial password
that is known to every peer. This encryption does not offer any protection of the content, except to
package the entire file for distribution.


===== page 558 =====
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 535
8.5.4 Collusive Piracy Prevention in P2P Networks
Figure8.34illustratestheconceptofproactivecontentpoisoning.Ifapiratesendsadownloadrequest
toadistributionagentoraclient,basedontheprotocoldefinitionitwillreceivepoisonedfilechunks.
Ifthedownloadrequestwassenttoacolluder,itwillreceivecleanfilechunks.Ifapiratesharesthe
file chunks with another pirate, it could spread the poison. Therefore, it is critical to send poisoned
chunks to pirates to deny their requests. Otherwise, the pirate still can assemble a clean copy from
thosecolluderswhohaverespondedwithcleanchunks.Withpoisoning,weexploitthelimitedpoison
detectioncapabilityofP2Pnetworksandforceapiratetodiscardthecleanchunksdownloadedwith
thepoisonedchunks.Therationalebehindsuchpoisoningisthatifapiratekeepsdownloadingacor-
ruptedfile,thepirateswilleventuallygiveuptheirattemptsoutoffrustration.
8.5.4.1 Randomized Colluder Detection
As reported in the GossipTrust paper [58], the gossip protocol and power nodes play a crucial role
in speeding up the reputation aggregation process in a P2P network. Randomized gossiping can
reach consensus among all peers in a distributed manner. This approach exploits massive concur-
rency among millions of active nodes in a very large P2P network. Figure 8.34 shows a simplified
GossipTrust system to identify colluders.
The idea is to associate each {peer, file} pair with a collusion rate. The “0” rate means the peer
was neverreported as acolluder. Otherwise, thepeeris gettinga collusionreport of “1,” meaning it
has shared clean contentwithillegal downloadrequesters.Thiscollusion rate is accumulative in the
same way eBay collects peers’ reputation scores.Figure 8.35 illustrates the collusion detection pro-
cess.Distributionagentsrandomlyrecruit clients,calleddecoys,tosendillegaldownloadrequeststo
Colluder Colluder
Client
Pirate
Client
P2P network
Agent
Agent
Pirate
= Clean Chunks = Poisoned Chunks
FIGURE8.34
ProactivepoisoninginatrustedP2Pnetwork,wherecleanchunks(white)arereceivedbylegitimateclients
andpoisonedchunks(shaded)bydetectedpirates.
(CourtesyofLouandHwang[31])


===== page 559 =====
536 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Client (decoy) Colluder
Client
2: Illegal requests 3: P c o h i u s n o k n s ed
Client 3:
Clean
(decoy)
chunks
P2P network
4: Report 1: Recruit
colluder decoys
Distribution
agent
FIGURE 8.35
Distributionagentrandomlyrecruitingsomeclientstoprobesuspectedpeers;peercollusionisreported
whenapeersuppliesacopyrightedfiletoanillegalrequestor.
(CourtesyofLouandHwang[31])
suspected peers. If an illegal request is returned with a clean file chunk, the decoy reports the collu-
sion event. Since the decoy is randomly chosen, there exists a risk that the report is not trustworthy
eitherbyerrororbycheating.Thus,areputationsystemisneededtoscreenthepeers.
A new PAP was developed to distinguish pirates from legitimate clients. Detected pirates will
receivepoisonedchunksintheirrepeatedattempts.Piratesarethusseverelypenalizedwithnochanceto
downloadsuccessfullyinatolerableamountoftime.Basedonsimulationresults,a99.9percentpreven-
tionratewasfoundinGnutella,KaZaA,andFreenet,whileforeMule,eDonkey,Morpheus,andothers
therate isbetween85percent and98percent.Thispreventionsystemisshowntobelesseffectivein
protectingpoison-resilientnetworkssuchasBitTorrentandAzureus.However,thepoisoningapproach
opensuplow-costP2Ptechnologyforcopyrightedcontentdelivery.Theadvantageliesmainlyinmini-
mumdeliveryspeed,highercontentavailability,andcopyrightcompliance(seeFigure8.36).
8.5.4.2 Pirate Download Time and Success Rate
To explore the limit of the trusted P2P system, various file sizes have been experimented. The pro-
tection success rate β is defined by the failure rate of pirates to download a file within a tolerance
threshold θ of time. The θ is set at 20 days for a 700 MB CD-ROM image file and 30 days for a
4.5 GB movie file.
Figure 8.36 simulates all three P2P network families with 100 paid clients, 900 colluders, and
1,000 pirates. This scenario of 90 percent colluders is very unlikely in a real-life P2P network. This
experiment is designed to approximate a worst-case scenario that all pirates adopt an aggressive
peer selection policy. The percentage of pirates that fail to download a clean copy within the time
frame θ as an approximated success rate β is measured. All β curves start with 100 percent initially.


===== page 560 =====
Trasaction server Client Bootstrap agent PKG
Msg0: Content
purchasing
Msg1: Digital
receit
Msg2: Digital receipt signature
Msg3: Authentication
request
Msg4: Private key
request
Msg5: Private key
reply
Msg6: Authentication
token
FIGURE8.36
TheprotectedpeerjoiningprocessforcopyrightedP2Pcontentdeliveryusingsevenmessagestosecure
communicationsamongfourpartiesinvolved.
(CourtesyofLouandHwang[31])
40%
20%
0%
1
Withoutpoisoning,theaveragedownloadtimeforaclientis1.5hours.TheGnutellafamily,includ-
ingKaZaA andLimeWire,hasanear-perfectsuccess rate (higherthan99.9 percent). TheeMulenet-
work has anaverageof85percentafter tolerating upto20days. Thesesuccessrates aresatisfactory,
becausemostpirateswillgiveuptryingafterafewdayswithoutsuccess.TheGnutellafamilyincluding
theKaZaAandLimeWirenetworkhasthehighestsuccessrate,closeto99.9percent,forbothfilesizes.
β
etar
sseccus
noitcetorP
8.5 P2P File Sharing and Copyright Protection 537
100%
80%
60%
eMule
BitTorrent
Gnutella
2 3 10 24 100 240 480 1000
Tolerance threshold θ (hours) in log scale
FIGURE8.37
ProtectionsuccessrateofasimulatedeMulenetworkbyprolongingthedeliverydelaytoanintolerable
magnitude.
(CourtesyofLouandHwang[31])


===== page 561 =====
538 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
With a tolerance threshold of 20 days in Figure 8.37, the eMule network has an average
98 percent success rate for the 4.5 GB file and 85 percent success rate for the 700 MB file. In
comparison, an average pirate in a BitTorrent network takes about 100 minutes to download the
700 MB file, only marginally longer than a paid client. Hence the success rate drops rapidly
before two hours. This implies that our system does not protect BitTorrent well due to its strong
resistance to content poisoning.
8.6 BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES AND HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
A good tutorial on P2P systems was given by Ross and Rubestein [38] at IEEE Infocom 2004. The
key concepts of P2P are introduced in Wikipedia [50]. Buford, et al. have treated P2P networking
and applications in a 2008 book [6]. The problem of building overlays for unstructured P2P net-
works has been studied in [13,28,52]. Enabling techniques for P2P computing are discussed in [5].
NetTube [8] leverages the high clustering property of videos and P2P techniques for improving
YouTube services. Keromytis, et al. [21] reported the SOS architecture and operational require-
ments. The Skype protocol was analyzed in [3] and measured in [15].
Reported work on consistent hashing can be found in [21]. Chord was first proposed by Stoica,
et al. [45] and extended by a large number of researchers [12,16]. CAN was proposed by
Ratnasamy, et al. [40]. Pastry was treated by Rowstron and Drusche [39]. Kademlia was proposed
in [35] and measured in [44]. Gnutella was studied in [60] and measured in [17], and Freenet in
[10]. Hybrid overlays are studied in [32]. Gnutella and Napster were also measured and compared
by Sarioiu, et al. in [41]. Network proximity for structured P2P networks was studied in [7,16,54],
while for unstructured P2P networks, studies can be found in [28,52]. The small-world networks is
studied in Kleinberg [22].
P2P churn resilience and fault tolerance are treated in [12,14,23,24,51]. Trust models for P2P
computinghavebeenstudiedin[19,27,43,49].ThreeP2Preputationsystems—EigenTrust,PeerTrust,
and PowerTrust—are reported in [20,53,57], respectively. P2P file-sharing and content distribution
technologies can be found in [1,25,37,31,37,41,46]. Data replication and network proximity are
studiedin[11,33].Overlaymulticastswereextensivelydiscussedin[9,47,48,56].P2Pvideostream-
ingisstudiedin[8,18,29,36].BitTorrenthasbeenstudiedin[4,26,30,59].
Ross and Rubestien [38] have suggested four important research areas for P2P systems: (1)
Locality in DHT-based systems, (2) Using DH to hash or not to hash, (3) Building a trusted sys-
tems from autonomous and untrusted collections, and (4). Building P2P systems to operate in high-
churn environments. These challenges are partially solved in some recent work on churn-resilient
load balancing [42], massive data dissemination [24], P2P trust management [43,57,58], and copy-
right protection [31]. A reputation system for social networking is reported in [55].
Acknowledgements
This chapter was jointly written by Zhenyu Li of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and by
Kai Hwang of the University of Southern California. The authors would like to acknowledge the
technical support from Gaogang Xie of CAS Institute of Computing Technology.


===== page 562 =====
References 539
References
[1] S. Androutsellis, D. Spinellis, A survey of P2P content distribution technologies. ACM. Comput. Surv.
(December) (2004).
[2] L. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barthelemy, M. Stanley, Classes of small-world networks. Natl. Acad. Sci.
97(21) (2000).
[3] S.A. Baset, H. Schulzrinne, An analysis of the Skype peer-to-peer Internet telephony protocol, in: Pro-
ceedings ofIEEE INFOCOM, April 2006.
[4] R. Bindal, P. Cao, W. Chan, et al., Improving traffic locality in BitTorrent via biased neighbor selection,
in: Proceedingsof IEEE ICDCS, 2006.
[5] B. Bloom, Space/time tradeoffs in hash coding with allowable errors. Commun. ACM. 13 (7) (1970)
422–426.
[6] J. Buford, H. Yu, E. Lua, P2P Networking and Applications, Morgan Kaufmann, December 2008. Also
www.p2pna.com.
[7] M. Castro, P. Druschel, Y.C. Hu, A. Rowstron, Exploiting network proximity in distributed hash tables,
in: Proceedingsof the International WorkshoponFutureDirections inDistributed Computing, June2002.
[8] X. Cheng, J. Liu, NetTube: exploring social networks for peer-to-peer short video sharing, in: Proceedings
of IEEE Infocom,March2009.
[9] S.Chen,B.Shi,S.Chen,ACOM:any-sourcecapacity-constrained overlaymulticastinnon-DHTP2Pnet-
works, in: IEEETransactions onParallel andDistributed Systems,September 2007,pp.1188–1201.
[10] I. Clarke, O. Sandberg, B. Wiley, T.W. Hong, Freenet: a distributed anonymous information storage and
retrieval system, in: ICSIWorkshop onDesign Issues inAnonymity andUnobservability,June2000.
[11] E. Cohen, S. Shenker, Replication strategies in unstructured peer-to-peer networks, in: ACM SIGCOMM,
2002.
[12] A. Fiat, J. Saia, M. Young, Making chord robust to Byzantine attacks, in: Proceedings of the European
Symposium onAlgorithms (ESA), 2005.
[13] A.J. Ganesh, A.M. Kermarrec, L. Massoulié, Peer-to-peer membership management for gossip-based pro-
tocols.IEEE. Trans. Computers. 52(2) (2003)139–149.
[14] P.B. Godfrey, S. Shenker, I. Stoica, Minimizing churn in distributed systems. in: Proceedings of ACM
SIGCOMM, 2006.
[15] S. Guha,N.Daswani, R. Jain,An experimental study of the Skypepeer-to-peer VoIP system, in: Proceed-
ings of the InternationalWorkshop onPeer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS),February 2006.
[16] K.P. Gummadi, R. Gummadi, S.D. Gribble, et al., The impact of DHT routing geometry on resilience and
proximity, in: Proceedingsof ACM SIGCOMM,2003.
[17] M. Hefeeda, O. Saleh, Traffic modeling and proportional partial caching for peer-to-peer systems, in:
IEEE/ACM TransactionsonNetworking, December 2008,pp. 1447–1460.
[18] Y. Huang, et al., Challenges, design and analysis of a large-scale P2P VOD system, in: Proceedings of
ACM SIGCOMM 2008,Seattle, August2008.
[19] K. Hwang, D. Li, Trusted cloud computing with secure resources and data coloring, IEEE. Inte. Comput.
(September) (2010)14–22.
[20] S. Kamvar, M. Schlosser, H. Garcia-Molina, The Eigentrust algorithm for reputation management in P2P
networks, ACM WWW ’03,Budapest, Hungary,2003.
[21] A. Keromytis, V. Misra, D. Rubenstein, SOS: secure overlay services, in: Proceedings of ANM SIG-
COMM’02, Pittsburg, PA.August 2002.
[22] J. Kleinberg, The small-world phenomenon: an algorithmic perspective, in: Proceedings 32nd ACM Sym-
posium onTheoryof Computing, Portland,OR. May2000.
[23] J. Leitao, J. Pereira, L. Rodrigues, Epidemic broadcast trees, in: Proceedings of the 26th IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium onReliable Distributed Systems,October 2007.


===== page 563 =====
540 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
[24] Z. Li, G. Xie, K. Hwang, Z. Li, Churn-resilient protocol for massive data dissemination in P2P networks,
in:IEEETransactions onParallel andDistributed Systems,accepted to appear2011.
[25] Z. Li, G. Xie, Z. Li, Efficient and scalable consistency maintenance for heterogeneous peer-to-peer sys-
tems, in:IEEE TransactionsonParallel andDistributed Systems,December 2008,pp.1695–1708.
[26] Z. Li, G. Xie, Enhancing content distribution performance of locality-aware BitTorrent systems, in: Pro-
ceedingsof IEEEGlobecom, December 2010.
[27] L. Liu, W. Shi, Trust and reputation management, in: IEEE Internet Computing, September 2010,
pp. 10–13. (special issue).
[28] Y. Liu, L. Xiao, X. Liu, L. M Ni, X. Zhang, Location awareness in unstructured peer-to-peer systems,
in: IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, February 2005, pp. 163–174.
[29] J. Liu, S.G. Rao, B. Li, H. Zhang, Opportunities and challenges of peer-to-peer internet video broadcast,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE Special Issue on Recent Advances in Distributed Multimedia Communica-
tions, Vol.96(1), 2008,pp. 11–24.
[30] T. Locher, P. Moor, S. Schmid, R. Watenhofer, Free riding in BitTorrent is cheap, in: Proceedings of
ACMHotNets, November 2006.
[31] X. Lou, K. Hwang, Collusive piracy prevention in P2P content delivery networks, in: IEEE Transactions
onComputers, Vol. 58,(7) 2009, pp.970–983.
[32] B.T. Loo, R. Huebsch, I. Stoica, J. M. Hellerstein, The Case for a Hybrid P2P Search Infrastructure, 3rd
International WorkshoponPeer-to-Peer Systems,February 2004.
[33] Q. Lv, P. Cao, E. Cohen, K. Li, S. Shenker, Search and replication in unstructured peer-to-peer networks,
in:Proceedings of theACM International Conference onSupercomputing, June2002.
[34] B. Maniymaran, M. Bertier, A.-M. Kermarrec, Build one, get one free: leveraging the coexistence of mul-
tiple P2P overlay networks, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Distributed Computing
Systems,Toronto, June2007.
[35] P. Maymounkov, D. Mazières, Kademlia: a peer-to-peer information system based on the XOR metric, in:
Proceedingsof the International WorkshoponPeer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS), March2002.
[36] N. Magharei, R. Rejaie, Y. Guo, Mesh or multiple-tree: a comparative study of live P2P streaming
approaches,in:Proceedings of IEEEINFOCOM, Alaska, May2007.
[37] G.Pallis, A.Vakali,Insight andperspectives for contentdelivery networks, Commun.ACM 49(1) (2006)
101–106.
[38] K.Ross,D.Rubenstein, Peer-to-peer systems, in:IEEE Infocom,Hong Kong,2004,(Tutorial slides).
[39] A. Rowstron, P. Druschel, Pastry: scalable, decentralized object location and routing for large-scale peer-
to-peer systems, in: Proceedings of the IFIP/ACM International Conference on Distributed Systems Plat-
forms(Middleware), Heidelberg, Germany,November 2001, pp.329–350.
[40] S. Ratnasamy, P. Francis, M. Handley, R. Karp, A scalable content-addressable network, in: Proceedings
ofACM SIGCOMM, August2001.
[41] S. Saroiu, P. Gummadi, S. Gribble, A measurement study of peer-to-peer file sharing systems, in: Multi-
media Computingand Networking (MMCN ’02),January2002.
[42] H.Shen,C.Xu,Locality-awareandchurn-resilientloadbalancingalgorithmsinstructuredpeer-to-peernet-
works,in:IEEETransactionsonParallelandDistributedSystems,Vol.18(6),June2007,pp.849–862.
[43] S. Song, K. Hwang, R Zhou, Y.K. Kwok, Trusted P2P transactions with fuzzy reputation aggregation,
in: IEEE Internet Computing, November–December 2005, pp. 18–28.
[44] M. Steiner, T. En-Najjary, E. Biersack, Long term study of peer behavior in the KAD DHT, in: IEEE/
ACMTransactions onNetworking, Vol.17(6) 2009.
[45] I. Stoica, R. Morris, D. Liben-Nowell, et al., Chord: a scalable peer-to-peer lookup service for Internet
applications, in:IEEE/ACM TransactionsonNetworking, Vol. 11(1) February 2003,pp. 17–32.
[46] K. Spripanidkulchai, B. Maggs, H. Zhang, Efficient content location using interest-based locality in peer-
to-peer systems, in:Proceedings of IEEEINFOCOM, 2003.


===== page 564 =====
Homework Problems 541
[47] C. Tang, R.N. Chang, C. Ward, GoCast: gossip-enhanced overlay multicast for fast and dependable group
communication, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks,
Yokohama, Japan,June2005, pp.140–149.
[48] V. Venkataraman, K. Yoshida, P. Francis, Chunkyspread: heterogeneous unstructured tree-based peer to
peer multicast,in: 14thIEEE International Conference onNetwork Protocols, November2006, pp.2–11.
[49] Y. Wang, J. Vassileva, Trust and reputation model in peer-to-peer networks, in: Third International Con-
ference onPeer-to-Peer Computing,August 2003.
[50] Wikipedia, Peerto Peer. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer, 2010(accessed14.08.2010).
[51] R.H. Wouhaybi, A.T. Campbell, Phoenix: supporting resilient low-diameter peer-to-peer topologies,
in: IEEE INFOCOM, 2004.
[52] L. Xiao, Y. Liu, L.M. Ni, Improving unstructured peer-to-peer systems by adaptive connection establish-
ment, in:IEEETransactions onComputers,Vol. 54(9), September2005,pp. 1091–1103.
[53] L. Xiong, L. Liu, Peertrust: supporting reputation-based trust for peer-to-peer electronic communities,
in: IEEETransactions onKnowledgeandData Engineering, Vol. 16(7), 2004,pp. 843–857.
[54] Z. Xu, C. Tang, Z. Zhang, Building topology-aware overlays using global soft-state, in: Proceedings on
the International Conference onDistributed Computing Systems,2003.
[55] M. Yang, Y. Dai, X. Li, Bring reputation system to social network in the maze P2P file-sharing system,
in: IEEE 2006 International Symposium on Collaborative Technologies and Systems (CTS 2006),
Las Vegas,14–17May2006.
[56] Z. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Ling, R. Chow, Capacity-aware multicast algorithms in heterogeneous overlay net-
works, in: IEEETransactions onParallel andDistributed Systems,February 2006,pp. 135–147.
[57] R. Zhou, K. Hwang, PowerTrust for fast reputation aggregation in peer-to-peer networks, in: IEEE Trans-
actions onParallel andDistributed Systems,April 2007,pp.460–473.
[58] R. Zhou, K. Hwang, M. Cai, GossipTrust for fast reputation aggregation in peer-to-peer networks, in:
IEEE TransactionsonKnowledge andDataEngineering, September 2008,pp. 1282–1295.
[59] Z. Zhou, Z. Li, G. Xie, ACNS: Adaptive complementary neighbor selection in BitTorrent-like applica-
tions, in: Proceedingsof IEEE ICC2009, Germany,2009.
[60] Y. Zhu, Y. Hu, Enhancing search performance on Gnutella-Like P2P systems, in: IEEE Transactions on
Parallel andDistributed Systems, Vol. 17(12), December 2006, pp.1482–1495.
HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
Problem 8.1
You studied the basic idea of DHT in Section 8.3.1. One important DHT-based protocol is
Kademlia [35]. The unique feature of Kademlia is that it has been successfully used in eDonkey/
eMule file-sharing systems. Study the Kademlia paper and compare it with Chord and CAN in
terms of routing complexity, maintenance cost, and scalability. Finally, download the source code
of eMule at www.emule-project.net and study how it works. If possible, modify the client
protocol to measure the eMule system. For measurement, please refer to the paper authored by
M. Steiner [44].
Problem 8.2
P2P VoD (video on demand) systems are different from P2P live streaming systems since P2P-VoD
has less synchrony in the users sharing video content, and thus it is very difficult to leverage end


===== page 565 =====
542 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
users’ resources. Please read the paper [18] authored by Huang, et al. Then list the challenges of
designing P2P VoD systems and explain how PPlive solves these challenges.
Problem 8.3
List the three types of approaches to exploit network proximity in structured P2P overlays and their
advantages and disadvantages. Section 8.3.3 points out that, in Chord overlay networks, a node x
can take the physically closest node whose identifier falls in the range
½x+2i,x+2i+1(cid:2)
as its i-th
figure entry, which does not affect routing complexity. Why does this hold?
Problem 8.4
Building network proximity-aware overlays would degrade the performance of search algorithms
such as flood-based algorithms and random walk-based algorithms since nodes are clustered into
groups and fewer links are built among the groups. For example, a random walk query message
may be forwarded within a cluster for many hops before reaching the cluster where the resource is
located. You are asked to design a search algorithm for clustered overlay networks.
Problem 8.5
Data delivery can also been implemented on top of a DHT-based structure. The representative
approach is CAM-Chord [56], which builds a capacity-aware Chord overlay and delivers data items
on top of it. CAM-Chord brings no redundant message, that is, to deliver an item to n nodes, only
n message is required. However, maintaining such a structure is nontrivial. Read the paper and
compare CAM-Chord with the ACOM [9] and CRP approaches [24]. Please focus on following
performance metrics: hop complexity, proximity awareness, overlay maintenance overhead, and data
replication ratio.
Problem 8.6
In Table 8.9, compare the routing algorithms of Chord, Pastry, and CAN by briefly filling in the
missing table entries. Let n be the network size (number of peer nodes) and d be the dimension
size. A few of the entries are already given as examples.
Problem 8.7
P2P traffic locality can also been improved by deploying cache at the gateway of the network pro-
vider. However, different from the HTTP access pattern, the popularity distribution of objects (files)
Table 8.9 Comparison of StructuredP2PNetworks
Features Chord Pastry CAN Kademlia
Routestate O(d)
Networkstructure Chordalring
Routingcomplexity O(logn)
Faulttolerance


===== page 566 =====
Homework Problems 543
does not follow Zipf law. Read the paper [17] and explain how the popularity distribution affects
the cache algorithm. Furthermore, discuss the advantages and shortcomings of different methods to
preserve locality.
Problem 8.8
In Section 8.5.1, you studied the basic search algorithms that do not consider semantic information
of shared content. It has been identified in [60] that building semantic overlays can significantly
improve search performance. Read this paper and their related works. You are asked to describe the
reasons why semantic overlays can enhance search performance.
Problem 8.9
YouTube is one of the largest web sites for user-generated videos. Tens of thousands of videos are
viewed each day by a large number of users. YouTube naturally leverages P2P techniques to allevi-
ate server loading. However, unlike traditional videos, user-generated videos are small. Study the
NetTube paper [8] and discuss the solution for using P2P techniques in YouTube content
distribution.
Problem 8.10
Analyze the fault tolerance of a Chord overlay with respect to the size of the successor list. Is it
sufficient to guarantee a stable Chord ring with high probability in the case that the successor list
size is O(log n) (n is the number of nodes), when every peer fails with probability ½?
Problem 8.11
BitTorrent is wildly used for file sharing. Files are divided into pieces. Nodes exchange the piece
availability information with their neighbors. When a node finds there is a piece that its neighbor
has but it has not downloaded yet, it sends a request for the piece to that neighbor. By default, the
piece size is 256 KB. Perform simulations using the code in http://theory.stanford.edu/~cao/biased-
bt.html to evaluate how piece size affects content distribution performance for files of various sizes.
Problem 8.12
Skype is a P2P-based VoIP system. It has been widely used and studied. Read the papers on Skype
[3]. Then describe the overlay structure of Skype, the bandwidth consumption characteristic, and
the impact of access capacity constraint on VoIP quality.
Problem 8.13
In mesh-based pull methods, each node advertises to its neighbors which data block it has received.
The neighbors explicitly request messages if needed. Tree-based push methods, on the other hand,
deliver data blocks along one or multiple tree structures. It is considered that mesh-based methods
suffer from a trade-off between control overhead and delay, while tree-based methods have a trade-
off between continuity and delay [48]. Read a survey paper on content delivery algorithms [36] and
a comparison study on mesh- and tree-based methods [29].You may consider combining these two
methods by leveraging network coding in tree-based systems.


===== page 567 =====
544 CHAPTER 8 Peer-to-Peer Computing and Overlay Networks
Problem 8.14
BitTorrent systems use the so-called “Tit-for-Tat” incentive scheme to enable contribution aware-
ness in content delivery. Some researchers point out that this mechanism is sufficient to ensure fair-
ness, but others are doubtful of this and free-riding is still cheap. Study these three papers in
[20,29,37]. Then answer the following two questions: (1) Which factor makes free riding so easy?
(2) Do you think “Tit-for-Tat” is sufficient to solve the problem? Justify your answers with
reasoning.
Problem 8.15
Match the overlay networks on the left with their best-match descriptions on the right:
_____eMule a)Astructuredoverlayusingacoordinatedmulti-dimensionalsearchspace
_____BitTorrent b)Anunstructuredoverlayforanonymousanddecentralizedstorageservices
_____Gnutella c)AP2Pnetworkforvideotelephonyapplications
_____Napster d)Anoverlaycodedwithhigh-radixnestedgroupsforproximityrouting
_____SETI@Home e)AP2Pfile-sharingnetworkusingmultiplefileindextrackers
_____KaZaA f)ThefirstP2PnetworkforMP3musicdeliveryusingacentralizedcontrol
_____Chord g)AsecureoverlayserviceforpreventingDDoSornetworkattacks
_____Pastry h)Anunstructuredoverlayusingfloodingsearchforfileproviders
_____Freenet i)AdecentralizedP2Pnetworkbuiltwithmultiplesupernodes
_____CAN j)AP2Pfile-sharingnetworkapplyinghashingata9.5MBpartlevel
_____Skype k)ADHT-basedoverlaystructurewithaO(logn)lookuptime
_____SOS l)AP2Pnetworkfordistributedprocessingofouterspacesignals
Problem 8.16
Consider a Chord overlay network with 64 keys identified by 6-bit key identifiers. Assume six
nodes (0, 4, 7, 12, 32, 50) are populated at present. The rest are not assigned yet. Answer the fol-
lowing questions using this Chord graph:
a. What are the data keys and node keys stored in node 0?
b. Work out the finger table for node 7. Describe how node 7 uses the finger table to find the
shortest routing path to reach the home node of a document file where data key 3 is located.
c. Describe how to insert a new node 45 into this Chord structure. You need to show the shortest
path on the Chord graph leading to the node holding key 45.
d. Use the finger table at the predecessor node to perform five lookup operations to establish the
finger table for this new node 45.


===== page 568 =====
CHAPTER
9
Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet
of Things
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Summary...........................................................................................546
9.1 CloudTrendsinSupportingUbiquitous Computing................................................546
9.1.1 Use ofClouds for HPC/HTC andUbiquitous Computing...............................546
9.1.2 Large-Scale PrivateClouds at NASAandCERN......................................552
9.1.3 Cloud Mashupsfor Agility andScalability............................................555
9.1.4 Cloudlets for Mobile CloudComputing...............................................558
9.2 Performanceof Distributed Systems andthe Cloud...............................................561
9.2.1 Review ofScience andResearch Clouds.............................................562
9.2.2 Data-Intensive Scalable Computing(DISC)...........................................566
9.2.3 Performance Metrics for HPC/HTC Systems..........................................568
9.2.4 Qualityof Service in CloudComputing...............................................572
9.2.5 BenchmarkingMPI, Azure,EC2,MapReduce,and Hadoop............................574
9.3 EnablingTechnologiesfor the Internetof Things.................................................576
9.3.1 TheInternet of Things forUbiquitous Computing.....................................576
9.3.2 Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID)...............................................580
9.3.3 Sensor Networksand ZigBeeTechnology............................................582
9.3.4 GlobalPositioning System (GPS)....................................................587
9.4 InnovativeApplications of the Internetof Things.................................................590
9.4.1 Applications of theInternet ofThings...............................................591
9.4.2 Retailing andSupply-Chain Management............................................591
9.4.3 Smart PowerGrid andSmart Buildings..............................................594
9.4.4 Cyber-Physical System (CPS).......................................................595
9.5 OnlineSocial andProfessional Networking......................................................597
9.5.1 OnlineSocialNetworking Characteristics............................................597
9.5.2 Graph-Theoretic Analysisof SocialNetworks.........................................600
9.5.3 Communities andApplications of SocialNetworks....................................603
9.5.4 Facebook:The World’sLargestSocialNetwork.......................................608
9.5.5 Twitterfor Microblogging, News, and AlertServices..................................611
9.6 BibliographicNotes andHomeworkProblems....................................................614
Acknowledgements.................................................................................614
References.........................................................................................614
Homework Problems................................................................................618
DistributedandCloudComputing 545
©2012Elsevier,Inc.Allrightsreserved.


===== page 569 =====
546 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
SUMMARY
Data-intensive applications and future trends of Internet clouds are discussed along the lines of sup-
porting mobile computing, ubiquitous computing, and social networking. First, public, private, and
science clouds and grid projects are reviewed, including those built by IBM, SGI, Salesforce.com,
NASA, and CERN. Requirements for data-intensive scalable computing are reviewed. Then perfor-
mance metrics are presented for high-performance computing grids and for high-throughput comput-
ing clouds. Cloud mashups, mobility support, and benchmark results on existing grids and clouds
are reported. The emergence of the Internet of Things and cyber-physical systems is assessed.
Finally, we analyze large-scale social networks. In particular, Facebook and Twitter are reviewed
with innovative applications.
9.1 CLOUD TRENDS IN SUPPORTING UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING
This chapter looks into the future of distributed and cloud computing systems and their innovative
applications. Distributed computing has changed rapidly in system structure, scale of operation, and
application domains in recent years. Clustered systems appeared first in the 1990s, which was evi-
denced by the increasing population of cluster-structured massively parallel processors (MPPs) in
the Top 500 supercomputer list. When we crossed into the 2000s grids became popular, appearing
as large-scale clusters of computer clusters. However, the general public has not embraced grids
due to their lack of flexibility in general-purpose applications.
Since 2005, many peer-to-peer (P2P) networks have appeared as file-sharing networks and
online social networks. In fact, e-books, video streaming, movie downloads, and social networking
largely dominate Internet traffic today. Computing clouds over data-center resources did not appear
until 2007. Clouds are still in their infancy stage, even though all the underlying technologies are
there. However, clouds do reflect the latest development trend that emphasizes elasticity and flex-
ibility by scaling out of computing services to automated data centers through virtualization.
Data-intensiveapplicationsandfuturetrendsofInternetcloudsarediscussedinthissection,along
the lines of supporting mobile computing, ubiquitous computing, and social networking. We assess
the development trends of both publicandprivate clouds, as they appear in many high-performance
or ubiquitous applications. The idea of cloud mashups is studied for agility and scalability. Future
trendsincloudsforbothbusinessandscientificapplicationsareexaminedwithillustratedexamples.
We will evaluate the performance of clouds and distributed systems in Section 9.2. We will
devote Sections 3 and 4 to the emerging Internet of Things (IoT) that naturally extends the current
Internet, as we are in transition from IPv4 (with a 32-bit address space) to IPv6 (with a 128-bit
address space). The IoT may lead to a new wave of IT advances and its application potential may
affect all walks of life and the global economy. Finally, we will study social networks and assess
their impact on the future of a digital society that is wide open to billions of Internet of IoT users.
9.1.1 Use of Clouds for HPC/HTC and Ubiquitous Computing
Ubiquitous cloud computing refers to the use of Internet resources at any place and any time for
any objectives. Today, people can access the Internet via a fixed wire or a mobile wireless


===== page 570 =====
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 547
connection. Science in the cloud has been impacted with a new research environment that leverages
software and services being provided on user demand. New advances in research discovery are
expected in high-energy physics, observatory astronomy, atmospheric modeling, and biomedicine.
Dan Reed [69] of Microsoft Research has assessed the revolution of today’s big-data, many-cores
pervasive clouds and their impact on scientific research in the information age. Some observations
by Reed are discussed below.
9.1.1.1 Herbert Simon on Information Consumption
Recall the statement by Herbert Simon: “What information consumes is rather obvious: it consumes
the attention of its recipients. Hence a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention, and a
need to allocate that attention efficiently among the overabundance of information sources that
might consume it.” This clearly outlines a supply and demand model in the information age. With
ubiquitous sensors, clouds, and mobile devices, we can retrieve information faster and more effec-
tively. We can consume information with much less cost in current and future data-explosive infor-
mation age.
9.1.1.2 Vannevar Bush on Predicting Memex
Another interesting insight was made by Vannevar Bush on the concept of “Memex.” He made his
predictionin1945,longbeforethecreationoftoday’sdigitalcomputers.Hepredictedadreamdevice
as follows: “Consider a future device for individual use, which is a sort of mechanized private file
and library. It needs a name, and to coin one at random, “memex” will do. A memex is a device in
whichan individual storesallhisbooks, records,and communications,and which ismechanizedso
thatitmaybeconsultedwithexceedingspeedandflexibility.Itisanenlargedintimatesupplementto
his memory.” What a coincidence ! Today, this “memex” device goes by the name of iPad, smart-
phone,cloud,IoT,virtualreality,andcyber-physicalsystem(CPS),amongmanyothers.
9.1.1.3 Cloud Service Trends
Table 9.1 summarizes cloud offerings from eight IT leaders and some startup cloud companies. We
already studied the cloud offerings from Amazon, Google, Microsoft, GoGrid, and Rackspace in
Chapters 4 and 6. Here we examine the remaining cloud service offerings from IBM, SGI, and
Salesforce.com. Other clouds are left for the readers to explore deeper.
9.1.1.4 IBM Cloud Projects
IBM has gradually changed from a hardware/software and system company to a computing services
company. The IBM cloud platforms are mostly built with IBM server clusters supported by IBM
WebSphere and accumulated software assets over the years. Both the z-series and p-series servers at
IBM are being upgraded with virtualization capabilities. In 2007, IBM began launching a number of
cloud-related R&D projects. These projects are extended from IBM’s previous work for on-demand
and autonomous computing using service-oriented architecture (SOA).
IBMEnsemblesofferavirtualizedcloudsystemforIaaSservices.Thissystemcanputtogethera
largeresourcepooltosimplifymanagementcomplexity.Thepurposeistoofferapplicationflexibility
andefficientresourcedeploymentthroughdynamicserver,storage,andnetworkensembles.IBMalso
developed the Tivoli Service Automation Manager (TSAM) for rapid design, deployment, and man-
agement of service processes. WebSphere CloudBurst (WCA) is another platform for managing


===== page 571 =====
548 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Table 9.1 Some ITCompaniesProviding Cloud Servicesor Products
Company,Year MajorCloudOfferings MajorUserGroups
Amazon AmazonWebServices(AWS);six 10,000businessesandindividual
Seattle,1994 Infrastructure-as-a-Service(IaaS)systems usersincludingtheNewYorkTimes,
includingEC2forcomputingcapacityand TheWashingtonPost,andEliLilly
S3foron-demandstoragecapacity
Enomaly ElasticComputingPlatformintegrating BusinessObjects,FranceTelecom,
Toronto,2004 enterprisedatacenterswithcommercial NBC,DeutscheBank,BestBuy
cloudofferings,managinginternaland
externalresourceswithvirtualmachine
(VM)migration
Google GAEofferingPlatform-as-a-Service(PaaS) Smallbusinesses,enterprises,and
MountainView, capabilityplusofficeproductivitytools collegesincludingArizonaState
CA,1998 includingGmail,calendartools,thePostini UniversityandNorthwesternUniversity
websitecreationtool,andsecurity
protectionservices
GoGrid Offersweb-basedstorageanddeploys Mostlystartups,Web2.0,and
SanFrancisco, Windows-andLinux-basedvirtualservers Software-as-a-Service(SaaS)
2008 inthecloudwithpreinstalledsoftwarefrom companies,plusafewbignameslike
Apache,PHP,andMicrosoftSQL SAPandNovell
Microsoft AzureofferingaWindows-as-a-service Epicor,S3Edge,andMicroFocus
Seattle,1975 platformconsistingoftheOSand usingAzuretodevelopcloud
developerservicesthatcanbeusedto applications
buildandenhanceweb-hostedapplications
NetSuite Abusinesssoftwaresuiteincluding BusinesscustomerssuchasPuck
SanMateo,CA, e-commerce,consumerrelationship CoffeeandWrigleyvilleSports
1998 management(CRM),accounting,and
enterpriseresourcesplanning(ERP)tools
Rackspace Mossocloudofferingaplatformforbuilding WebdevelopersandSaaSproviders
SanAntonio,TX, websites;cloudfilesforastorageservice; suchasZapproved,whichuses
1998 andCloudServers,anEC2-likeservicethat Mossotodeliveranonlineproductivity
providesaccesstovirtualizedserver tool
instances
Saleforce.com OffersCRMtoolsforsalesforce 500,000customersinfinancial
SanFrancisco, automation,analytics,marketing,andsocial services,communications,andmedia,
1999 networking;Force.comoffersaPaaSfor energy,andhealthcare
buildingwebapplicationsonthe
Salesforce.cominfrastructure
privateclouds.IBMLotusLiveoffersanSaaScloudforapplicationservicedevelopment.Theservices
includeanonlineconferenceservice,coordinatedofficemanagement,ande-mailservices.
9.1.1.5 IBM RC2 Cloud
The computer and IT infrastructures of eight IBM Research Centers are now strongly connected to
form a private cloud, called the Research Compute Cloud (RC2). RC2 is web-based, allowing
more than 3,000 IBM researchers worldwide to share computing resources. It is also IBM’s internal
testbed for promotion of cloud technology. RC2 provides solutions to establish an autonomous


===== page 572 =====
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 549
computing environment on user demand. At the time of this writing, the RC2 cloud serves more
than 3,000 IBM researchers and developers worldwide as a large testbed for private cloud services.
The system supports machine virtualization, service life-cycle management, and performance
monitoring. The idea is to reduce computing costs by outsourcing jobs to best-fit sites for rapid
resource deployment, and thus optimal execution. The project also evaluates green energy savings
and dynamic resource optimization. In a typical RC2 service setting, the user uses the web service
to submit a new order of RC2 resources such as VMs and storage. Then the user specifies the order
with special service-level agreements (SLAs) regarding resource quantity and capacity classes. RC2
management approves the order with provisioned resources and services, and RC2 monitors the pat-
terns of requested resources and handles billing at the completion of the service.
Example 9.1 IBM Blue Cloud System
In November 2007, IBM announced the Blue Cloud Project based on open standards and open source
software. The project is supported by more than 200 IBM web-scale researchers worldwide. Blue Cloud
combines several existing software and virtualization packages on a specifically designed IBM hardware
server platform. Open source and private software is combined to form the cloud computing environment.
The Blue Cloud is built with x-servers, that are very similar to x86 processors. (Figure 9.1). Linux runs on
theseservers supportedbyXEB-based virtualization software.
Developer
DB2.
User
WebSphere.
Application
server
Tivoli monitoring agent
Open source Linux with Xen
Tivoli. Tivoli.
Monitoring Provisioning
manager
FIGURE9.1
ArchitectureoftheBlueCloudsystembuiltwithIBMhardwareandsoftwarealongwithsomeopensource
LinuxandXen.
(CourtesyofIBMBlueCloudProject)
[image text] clipse
rrrrr


===== page 573 =====
550 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
SpecialsoftwareincludesTivoliformonitoringofvirtualclusteroperations(seewww-01.ibm.com/software/
tivoli/products/monitor fordetails).DB2managesstructureddata,andthe TivoliProvisioningManagerprovi-
sionsvirtualserverstophysicalnodes(seewww-03.ibm.com/systems/power/software/virtualization/index.html
fordetails).TheWebSphereApplicationServer isusedforbuildingapplicationportals.Opensourcesoftware
is usedin thebackground forbuilding thecloud applicationto processlarge-scaledata. Xenisusedasthe
container of running instances of cloud applications. Hadoop is used to process massive amounts of data
basedontheMapReduceparadigm.
9.1.1.6 Cloud System from SGI
In February 2010, SGI announced the Cyclone, a large-scale on-demand cloud computing service
for high-performance computing (HPC) applications. Both SaaS and IaaS models are offered on the
Cyclone. The SaaS model offers users prepackaged technical applications covering a wide range of
domains. For example, the system can be used to perform computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and
finite element analysis in both the airplane and automobile industries. With the IaaS model, users
can access SGI’s fastest Altix servers and ICE clusters, which are networking and storage systems
managed and optimized by SGI experts for specific user applications.
Companies today deal with increasingly difficult business problems, ever-growing amounts of
data to manage and process, and pressure to deliver results in record time. Most attack this critical
problem by expanding their IT infrastructure, which often comes with unforeseen administration
and facility costs and lower-than-expected throughput due to data bottlenecks. The SGI Altix ICE
integrated blade cluster was designed for today’s data-intensive problems and avoids these pitfalls.
This innovative new platform raises the efficiency bar, easily scaling to meet virtually any proces-
sing requirements without compromising ease of use, manageability, or price/performance.
Example 9.2 SGI Cyclone Cloud for High-Performance Computing
Figure 9.2 shows the architecture of the SGI Cyclone HPC cloud. The SGI servers can scale up, scale out,
or combine in a hybrid mode to match specific user application requirements. The Cyclone HPC cloud
supports many well-known scientific and engineering applications including OpenFOAM, NUMECA, Acu-
solve, LS-Dyna, Gaussian, Gamess, NAMD, FASTA, and ClustaIW. These cloud applications benefit many
industrial and government sectors including green energy, manufacturing, digital media, entertainment,
financial government, research, and higher education. Customers can expand their compute and storage
capacity with no capital outlay. Advantages are demonstrated by the elimination of lengthy procurement
and installation cycles. Users can request infrastructure as they see fit without worrying about infrastruc-
ture management. The Cyclone cloud platform is protected by SGI firewalls and virtual private network
(VPN) accesschannels.
Cyclone is an on-demand cloud computing service specifically dedicated to technical applications.
Cyclone supports a numberof leading applicationpartners andfive technicaldomains, including computa-
tional fluid dynamics, finite element analysis, computational chemistry and materials, computational
biology, and ontology. Cyclone is available in two service models: SaaS and IaaS. With the SaaS model,
Cyclone customerscansignificantly reducetime toresults byaccessingleading-edgeopen sourceapplica-
tions and best-of-breed commercial software platforms from top independent software vendors. The IaaS
model enablescustomers to installand runtheir ownapplications.


===== page 574 =====
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 551
Cyclone customer
secure login
Results on demandTM
SGI firewall VPN
VPN
Data/application license loaded
Management server for
Persistent
pre-& post-processing
storage
and job scheduling
SGI servers
Scale-up Scale-out Hybrid
Systems workload storage
FIGURE9.2
SGICycloneHPCcloudforenablingSaaSandIaaSapplications.
(CourtesyofM.Barrenechea,SGICEO,www.sgi.com/cyclone,Feb.2010)
SGI Altix provides scale-up, Altix ICE provides scale-out, and Altix XE hybrid clusters are used for
hybrid management of cloud servers, all based on Intel Xeon or Itanium processors. Altix is a line of ser-
vers and supercomputers produced by Silicon Graphics, based on Intel processors. Altix servers have
gone through many revisions, the latest being the SGI Altix 4700. This server offers blade configurability in
an uncompromising data-centric architecture capable of sustaining terabytes of data throughput. It fea-
tures “plug and solve” blade configurability in data-centric architecture capable of sustaining terabytes of
data throughput. Like its predecessors, the SGI Altix 4700 platform has been designed for technical users
based onindustry-standard CPUs, memory, andI/O.


===== page 575 =====
552 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.1.1.7 Salesforce.com’s Force.com Cloud
Salesforce.com was established in 1999 to provide online solutions to SaaS, mainly in CRM appli-
cations. Initially, it used third-party cloud platforms to promote its software services. Gradually,
Salesforce.com launched Force.com as a PaaS platform. By 2010, Salesforce.com subscribers
exceeded 2.1 million. Example 9.3 describes the Force.com platform cloud.
Example 9.3 The Force.com Cloud from Salesforce.com
Salesforce.com offers its Force.com platform to support some SaaS and IaaS applications. The platform
allows external developers to create add-on applications that integrate into the main Salesforce.com
hosted applications. It is aimed at enterprise users in business computation applications. In addition
to making CRM easier for users to apply in cloud services, Force.com provides Apex, a proprietary
Java-like programming language, and the Visualforce to simplify the business development cycle. The
AppExchange, is designed to enable multiple users to interact and perform coordinated work easily.
Application services are mainly in the areas of CRM databases, application development, and
customization.
In the security area, Salesforce.com provides not only some mechanisms to protect data integrity, but
also some access control mechanisms to ensure administrative security and record security. The company
introduced Chatter as a “Facebook for the enterprise” in June 2010. The packaging service helps usersto
release their application innovations. Users can customize their CRM applications in the Force.com plat-
form. The system features “Contacts,” “Report,” and “Account” tabs. Users can add sets of customized
/novel tabs for specific features in finance and human resources applications. In addition, the Force.com
platform also providesSOAP web service APIs. Mobile support is provided for subscribers with BlackBerry,
iPhone, and Windowsmobile devices. The Salesforce.com SaaS and PaaS services can work in more than
a dozen international languages.
9.1.2 Large-Scale Private Clouds at NASA and CERN
In 2010, two large-scale private clouds were under construction in the United States and European
Union. We discuss them in this section to demonstrate the scalable growth of cloud computing plat-
forms. The U.S. cloud, called Nebula, is developed by NASA and is designed for NASA scientists
to run climate models on remote systems provided by NASA. This can save thousands of NASA
users from acquiring supercomputers at their local sites. Furthermore, it enables NASA to build the
complex weather models around its data centers, which is more cost-effective.
The EU cloud is built by CERN in Geneva. This is a large private cloud for distributing data,
applications, and computing resources to thousands of scientists around the world. CERN deals
with large data sets and throughput with a global workforce and a finite budget. Many private
clouds are also under development by the IT industry, large enterprises, and other government agen-
cies. Initially, one can see that most clouds are developed with restricted user groups. Once these
clouds become mature and more secure to use to prove their claimed advantages, they could be
converted to public clouds in the future.


===== page 576 =====
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 553
9.1.2.1 NASA’s Nebula Cloud
Nebula is a cloud computing pilot under development at NASA Ames Research Center (Figure 9.3).
It integrates a set of open source components into a seamless, self-service platform, providing high-
capacity computing, storage, and network connectivity using a virtualized, scalable approach to
achieve cost and energy efficiencies. Nebula is currently being used for education and public out-
reach, for collaboration and public input, and for mission support. Nebula enhances NASA’s ability
to collaborate with external scientists and researchers by providing high-speed data connections and
consistent tool sets and open data APIs used by commercial cloud providers. Built from the ground
up around principles of transparency, Nebula is also an open source project.
When completed, the Nebula platform will offer a turnkey computing solution that can rapidly
addresstherequirementsofalargenumberofprojects.EachcomponentoftheNebulaplatformwillbe
availableindividually,serving SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS needsacrosstheagency.NASAwilluseNebula
formissionsupport,education,andpublicoutreachandtoencouragecollaborationandpublicinput.In
linewiththeObamaadministration’seffortstoestablish anopenandtransparent government,Nebula
willprovideNASAwithaneasy,efficient,andsecurewaytointeractandsharedatawiththepublic.
Proxy (Varnish/Apache) and eAuth Python
NEBULA - Cloud web interface APPS - Directory CODE - Cloud IDE (Staging) JAVA
Eucalyptus web FrontEnd LCROSS Subversion FrontEnd LCROSS Other
RabbitMQ web FrontEnd MS WWT TRAC FrontEnd MS WWT
LUSTER web FrontEnd ... Agilo FrontEnd ...
Fabric based deployment Selenium grid and cruise control
SOLR indexing and search
RabbitMQ message queue
Virtualized servers
MySQL
Eucalyptus
cluster
VM controller
(DRBD)
Users
LUSTER file system LUSTER file system
(SAML &
LDAP)
PHY PHY PHY PHY PHY
NEBULA1 NEBULA1 NEBULA1 NEBULA1 NEBULA1 PHY PHY PHY
FIGURE9.3
TheNebulacloudunderdevelopmentatNASA(http://nebula.nasa.gov).
(CourtesyNASA/AmesResearchCenter)


===== page 577 =====
554 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.1.2.2 Nebula Development Status
Nebula is available to NASA’s internal project groups and its research and academic partners. Nebula
is not available for use by private industry or the general public. Nebula is also currently acting as a
testbed for federal cloud computing technology for the Office of Management and Budget. Nebula
uses a containerized data center to house servers on the NASA Ames Research Center campus. These
containerized centers are proven to be the “greenest” form of data center because they are denser, and
thus require less energy to keep them cool. Cloud computing can be three to five times more efficient
than traditional networks or server centers. Another way Nebula is working to make cloud computing
more efficient is to actually turn computers on the network off to save energy. Some estimates show
Nebula to be 50 percent more energy efficient than traditional data centers.
9.1.2.3 CERN Super Cloud
CERN has long been an influential leader in solving complex IT problems. In fact, the World Wide
Web owes a lot to CERN for its usefulness in getting some early work done there. Now, the focus
is on cloud computing, CERN scientists plan to smash two particle beams together in an attempt to
re-create the “big bang” event to uncover the enigma of many fundamental physics phenomena.
The CERN scientists realize the use of cloud computing over their large data centers may be more
cost-effective in performing the required simulation experiments.
Tens of thousands of scientists around the world are feeding off the huge data sets and doing all
kinds of research by themselves. CERN believes the cloud project will allow it to deliver increased
computing performance and offer better infrastructure services to its 10,000 researchers from
85 countries. At CERN, massive amounts of scientific data are processed and must be distributed to
researchers in near real time. As a result, CERN’s cloud infrastructure has to provide the capacity
necessary to support production and analysis of more than 15 petabytes of data per year, processed
by 60,000 CPU cores, allowing scientists to manage workloads themselves as opposed to a centra-
lized IT management department at CERN’s laboratory near Geneva.
Because CERN uses the platform’s Load Sharing Facility (LSF) grid and workload management
solution to enable extensive scalability to analyze its vast amount of research data, the laboratory
chose to partner again with the platform to explore how to more effectively utilize their resources
in a virtualized cloud environment. Platform LSF and its adaptive cluster provide an open, low-cost,
common platform for CERN’s scientists, allowing management of both virtual and physical servers
in the cloud. In addition, scientists can manage their own application environments and control pro-
jects dynamically for maximum flexibility and efficient workload processing.
9.1.2.4 CERN VM Projects
Scientists working on the ALICE (A Large Ion Collider Experiment) collaboration are conducting
heavy ion simulations at CERN. They have been developing and debugging compute jobs on a col-
lection of internationally distributed resources, managed by a scheduler called AliEn, to integrate a
cloud’s dynamically provisioned resources into an existing infrastructure such as the ALICE pool of
computers. The purpose is to ensure that the various AliEn services have the same deployment-
specific information. The CERN VM project developed a way to provide VMs that can be used as
a base supporting the production environment for all large experiments at CERN.


===== page 578 =====
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 555
The CERN VM technology was originally started with the intent to supply portable development
environments that scientists could run on their laptops and desktops. A variety of virtual image for-
mats are now supported, including the Xen images used by Amazon EC2 as well as science clouds.
The challenge was to find a way to deploy these images so that they would dynamically and
securely register with the AliEn scheduler, and thus join the ALICE resource pool.
9.1.2.5 Road Map of CERN Cloud Construction
Nimbus is a cloud OS that allows a user to securely provide context-specific information to a VM
deployed on remote resources. It places minimal compatibility requirements on the cloud provider
and can orchestrate information exchange across many providers. Commercial cloud providers such
as EC2 allow users to deploy groups of unconnected VMs, whereas scientists typically need a
ready-to-use cluster whose nodes share a common configuration and security context. The Nimbus
Context Broker bridges that gap.
Integration of the Nimbus Context Broker with the CERN VM technology has proved a success.
The new system dynamically deploys a VM on the Nimbus cloud at the University of Chicago,
which then joins the ALICE computer pool so that jobs can be scheduled on it. Moreover, with the
addition of a queue sensor that deploys and terminates VMs based on demand, researchers can
experiment with ways to balance the cost of additional resources against their need as evidenced by
jobs in a queue.
In 2009, the CERN started an IaaS setup. The batch computing farm is a critical part of the
CERN data center today. It has the ability to use the IaaS to provision a large number of virtual
batch worker nodes. By doing so, both the VM provisioning system and the batch application itself
have been tested on a large scale. Eventually, the cloud at CERN will be able to sustain 15,000 or
more concurrent virtual batch worker nodes.
9.1.3 Cloud Mashups for Agility and Scalability
In web application development, a mashup is a web page or application that combines data, presen-
tations, or functionality from two or more sources to create a new service. The main characteristics
of the mashup are a combination of virtualization and aggregation. In cloud computing, the cloud
has captured the computing market with dynamic resource allocation from a pool of VM resources.
Table 9.1 listed the diversity of cloud offerings; the resource pool can be employed for both parallel
and distributed computing as demonstrated by the Amazon EC2 and S3 services. On the other hand,
Google’s App Engine (GAE) is primarily driven by web-based service offerings for storage of files,
e-mailing, and messaging, among others.
Not only are AWS and GAE different in terms of their functionalities, but they also can comple-
ment each other. This has triggered the idea of mashing up different clouds to build an intercloud or
cloud of clouds dynamically. We will demonstrate how to mash up GAE and AWS clouds to
achieve the desired features of application agility and performance scalability. In fact, cloud mash-
ups offer a more cost-effective solution to new startups that do not want to invest in cloud hardware
and software to create their own enterprise-level data center or private cloud. A cloud mashup must
be designed to support popular paradigms such as MapReduce on AWS, and yet be controllable via
GAE through easy-to-operate web interfaces.


===== page 579 =====
556 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.1.3.1 The Idea of a Cloud Mashup
Any startup in today’s business world needs to keep its operational costs low in the initial years.
This allows the business to recover its initial investments and post profits quickly. This, in turn,
prompts venture capitalists to fund the company in hopes of a quick return on investment and the
ability to supply more capital to allow the company to grow. Thus, it is critical that the company
keep its initial costs low. Consider a startup company working as a social networking portal. It
needs lots of data storage space and servers, as well as associated cooling requirements and infra-
structure such as a physical building to house its equipment. This leads to a moderate to large initial
investment on the part of the company.
One can use the pay-per-use models from public clouds such as AWS and GAE to quickly bring
the business up to speed. This can not only ensure that the loss due to time-to-market is reduced,
but it can also enhance the speed with which one can unleash a new idea into the business world.
Business mashups are also popular today as more and more businesses can complement each other
nicely. Today’s mashups are typically dataflow systems with the interaction scripted in languages
such as JavaScript or PHP. The ProgrammableWeb site, for example, reported more than 2,000
APIs and 5,000 mashups in September 2010 [84]. Commercial mashup examples include Yahoo!
Pipes (http://pipes.yahoo.com/pipes/), Microsoft Popfly (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_
Popfly), and IBM’s sMash-enhanced BPEL Web 2.0 [156].
Example 9.4 A Mashup Cloud Designed on the AWS and GAE Platforms
Figure 9.4 shows the concept of mashing up the GAE and AWS platforms. Essentially, one gets user input
files from GAE and uses the AWS infrastructure for MapReduce. To prove the effectiveness of mashups,
the performance of MapReduce on the mashup platform is experimented with scalable EC2 resources.
We demonstrate the results of AWS-GAE mashup experiments conducted at the University of Southern
California [18]. Themashupprovider iscrucial tolinkthe twocloudplatforms together.
The mashup design leverages Google’s web agility with the scaling power of AWS EC2. This
mashup helps a user to write agile software on GAE and use the user inputs to perform parallel com-
puting operations on AWS. Also, the creator can apply parallel computing operations to a user-owned
User
User
User Google AppEngine Amazon AWS
Mash-up provider
FIGURE 9.4
TheconceptofamashupbetweentheGAEandAWScloudplatforms.
(CourtesyofV.DixitofUniversityofSouthernCalifornia[18])


===== page 580 =====
cluster. AWS is not very handy as a scalable web interface because the size of EC2 has to be
increased by subscriber request. Also, the name server has to be built by the user to isolate the end
server from becoming directly visible on the network. On the other hand, Google is more cost-effective
in this aspect.
A typical online business such as eBay requires computing power that generates relevant results
for its consumers to increase sales. This is beyond what a web-based architecture such as GAE can
deliver. So, such a business would need a larger computing “farm,” available from Amazon through
its AWS offerings. This model allows users to perform a number of computations on a VM. Con-
sider a business running information located on an Excel spreadsheet in a Windows host and com-
putation code written on a UNIX-based system. In this case, GAE, which has no capability to
“execute” programs, becomes useless. In fact, any executable code needed by a business cannot use
the Google model of service. AWS then becomes the preferred way to accomplish this.
9.1.3.2 Mashup Experimental Results
We tested a word counting program written in Python over a large data set of 2 GB. The job was
submitted from GAE and was executed on an Amazon EC2 platform. Power regression of data was
assumed. The MapReduce scheme was applied for parallel executions on the EC2 cluster of varying
numbers of VM nodes from 1 to 60. The results are plotted in Figure 9.5 after a curve fitting exer-
cise. One can clearly see scalable performance with reduced execution time, as EC2 grows from
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1 2 4 10 20
Num of nodes
sdnoces
ni
emiT
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 557
Large data
(2GB)
time taken in
seconds
Power
regression for
large data
(2GB)
time taken in
seconds
40 60
FIGURE9.5
Scalableperformanceonthemashupcloudwithdecreasingexecutiontimeofa2GBdatasetonEC2up
to60VMinstances.
(CourtesyofV.DixitofUniversityofSouthernCalifornia[18])


===== page 581 =====
558 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
1 to 60 nodes. It takes 1,000 seconds to process 2 GB of data on one node and the time is reduced
to 300 seconds over 60 nodes.
9.1.3.3 Advantages of Cloud Mashups
A startup business that offers web-based applications involving large amounts of storage and that
depends critically on its web page being up all the time should consider a cloud provider offering a
dynamically scaled (load-based scaling) mechanism, as this would lead to increased availability in
the face of a sudden increase in demand, which is common to startups. Also, the ability to quickly
and automatically scale down allows the business to keep operational costs low. The business com-
puting platform needs to deliver not only scalable services, but also agility to survive and compete.
A mashup can combine several platforms or APIs to provide a wider scope of services that allows
more flexibility and agility to users:
(cid:129) Scalability on the EC2 virtual clusters Scaling the implementation of MapReduce
implementation can be scaled in terms of problem size and virtual cluster size. Regarding cluster
size, the USC experiments run MapReduce from 1 VM node to 40 VM nodes on the EC2
infrastructure. Thus, scaling is well explored on EC2 to yield scalable performance.
(cid:129) Agility in using GAE interfaces A mashup platform is built by combining GAE and AWS,
essentially using Google’s web interfaces and Amazon’s EC2 computing power. We use GAE
to create a web page that is capable of uploading documents to GAE and running MapReduce
on EC2. The mashup then sends the results back to Google users.
9.1.3.4 Lessons Learned about Cloud Mashups
In creating a scalable and agile mashup, it has been demonstrated that the most popular cloud plat-
forms hold significant promise for entrepreneurs and established companies alike. The various
synergies explored provide insight into what a company would need to do in order to be more scal-
able with increasing users and data and what is required to be agile in such an environment. By not
being tied down to any single platform or implementation, the idea of agility within a mashup has
been demonstrated [20].
SLAs must be established among cloud companies so that a seamless setup can be constructed.
The mashup provider has to provide the functionality manually. Lack of security among cloud pro-
viders could become a bottleneck for scaling applications beyond a few hundred users. However,
this is exactly where the agility of this approach comes into play by allowing the arrangement to be
migrated easily across platform boundaries.
Building a private cloud platform may become even more effective to explore the scalability and
agility of a mashup system, especially when the number of users or data sets grows rapidly. By
employing modular data centers, the costs of uploading data across geographically dispersed cloud
providers can be alleviated. Wide-range benchmark work is still required to validate the effective-
ness of the mashup synergies. MapReduce results demonstrate the feasibility of this approach. The
other synergies for different models, such as Dryad and Pig Latin, may produce contradictory
results due to differences in computing structure and languages used.
9.1.4 Cloudlets for Mobile Cloud Computing
Recently, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University, Microsoft, AT&T, and Lancaster University
[74] proposed a low-cost infrastructure to enable cloud computing using mobile devices. The idea


===== page 582 =====
9.1 Cloud Trends in Supporting Ubiquitous Computing 559
is called Cloudlet, and it offers a resource-rich portal for upgrading mobile devices with cognitive
abilities to access distant clouds. This portal should be designed to be trustworthy and use VMs to
explore location-aware cloud applications. The idea can be applied to opportunity discovery, fast
information processing, and intelligent decision making on the road. Cloudlet makes it possible for
mobile devices to access the Internet cloud easily in cost-effective mobile computing services.
9.1.4.1 The Cloudlet Idea
Figure 9.6 illustrates the idea of using cloudlets for mobile cloud computing. Both mobile devices
and centralized clouds or data centers have shortcomings in terms of supporting mobile computing.
Mobile handsets face problems of limited CPU power, storage capacity, and network bandwidth on
smartphones and tablet computers. Mobile devices cannot be used to handle large data sets. How-
ever, the distant cloud on the Internet faces the WAN latency problem. Clouds have to solve this
collision problem of too many (millions) clients logging in to the cloud simultaneously.
To solve this two-sided problem cloudlets are being deployed at convenient sites, such as coffee
shops and bookstores, similar to access points for WiFi services for connecting to the Internet.
Widely deployed cloudlets enable distributed cloud computing and extended resource handling for
these users. The idea is to use the cloudlet as a flexible gateway or portal to access the distant
cloud. The cloudlet can be implemented on PCs, workstations, or low-cost servers. The major inno-
vation lies in using VM-based flexibility to handle requests from different mobile devices.
9.1.4.2 Differences between Cloudlets and Clouds
As Table 9.2 shows, cloudlets are decentralized and self-managed, like a “virtual data center in a
box.” Cloudlets operate with LAN latency and bandwidth with only a few users at a time. Clouds
are centralized at large-scale data centers. They are professionally administrated all the time and
they need large machine rooms with uninterrupted power and cooling. The main problem for a dis-
tant cloud to be accessed by mobile devices lies in the long latency experienced with the Internet or
WANs. The problem becomes more complicated when thousands or millions of users simulta-
neously demand services.
Olympus
mobile eye trek
wearable
computer
Low-latency Distant cloud
Android
high-bandwidth on Internet
phone
wireless
network
Nokia N810
tablet
Handtalk Coffee shop
wearable cloudlet
glove
FIGURE9.6
VM-basedcloudletsformobilecloudcomputingapplications.
(CourtesyofSatyanarayanan,etal.©IEEE[74])
[image text] [741)


===== page 583 =====
560 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Table 9.2 Differences betweenLocalCloudlets and DistantClouds
Cloudlet Cloud
State Onlysoftstate Hardandsoftstate
Management Self-managed;littletonoprofessional Professionallyadministered,24×7operator
attention
Environment “Datacenterinabox”atbusiness Machineroomwithpowerconditioning
premises andcooling
Ownership Decentralizedownershipbylocalbusiness CentralizedownershipbyAmazon,
Yahoo!,etc.
Network LANlatency/bandwidth Internetlatency/bandwidth
Sharing Fewusersatatime 100s−1000sofusersatatime
Mobile device Cloudlet
Preload base VM
Discover & negotiate
use of cloudlet
Private
VM overlay (base + overlay) → launch VM
Execute launch VM
Use User-driven
cloudlet device-VM
interactions
Finish use
Done
Create VM residue
Depart VM
residue
Discard VM
FIGURE 9.7
FastVMsynthesisinKimberleyprototypecloudletbuiltatCMU.
(CourtesyofSatyanarayanan,etal.©IEEE[74])
9.1.4.3 Fast VM Synthesis in Cloudlets
A cloudlet prototype named Kimberley was built at Carnegie Mellon University. This prototype
synthesizes a VM overlay in the cloudlet host. CMU has reported fast VM synthesis times of less
than 100 seconds. In other words, it has created a VM overlay in transient cloudlets that is custo-
mized to bind cloud resources at a distance to satisfy user needs. Figure 9.7 shows the timeline for
dynamic VM synthesis in Kimberley. A small VM overlay is delivered by a mobile device to the
cloudlet that already possesses a base VM. The VM overlay plus the base VM create a special
execution environment for the mobile device to launch its cloud applications through the cloudlet
portal. Trust and security issues are also major factors in cloudlet deployment.


===== page 584 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 561
Table 9.3 Mobility andSecurity Support forIoT Applications
MobilitySupportandData HardwareandSoftwareMeasures
IOTServiceLevel ProtectionMethods forCloudSecurity
Datasensingand (cid:129) Specialairinterfaces (cid:129) Hardware/softwarerootoftrust
networkingsupport (cid:129) MobileAPIdesign (cid:129) SecureprovisioningofVMs
(cid:129) File/logaccesscontrol (cid:129) Softwarewatermarking
(cid:129) Datacoloring (cid:129) Host-basedfirewallsandIDSes
Supportofcloud (cid:129) UseofwirelessPKI (cid:129) Network-basedfirewallsandIDSes
platformsforprocessing (cid:129) Userauthentication (cid:129) Trustoverlaynetwork
senseddata (cid:129) Copyrightprotection (cid:129) Reputationsystems
(cid:129) VPN (cid:129) OSpatchmangement
9.1.4.4 Mobility and Security Support in IoT Applications
Table 9.3 summarizes the mobility support, data protection, security infrastructure, and trust man-
agement in mobile computing and cloud-supported IoT applications. The purpose is to safeguard
these cloud computing services in a fixed or mobile distributed computing environment for applica-
tion listed in Table 9.3. Mobility support includes special air interface and mobile API designs and
the use of wireless Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) for mobile access of cloud platforms. VPNs can
be also used to secure cloud platforms. Data protection includes file/log access control, data color-
ing, and copyright compliance. Disaster recovery is also needed in case of hardware/software fail-
ures. Cloud security can be enforced by establishing the root of trust, securing the VM provisioning
process, using software watermarking, and using firewalls and intrusion detection systems (IDSes)
at the host and network levels. Recently, trust overlay networks and reputation systems [43] were
suggested to protect data centers in trusted cloud computing.
9.2 PERFORMANCE OF DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS AND THE CLOUD
In this section, we will study the performance issues of both distributed HPC systems and clouds or
data-center-based HTC systems. First, we review the data-intensive scalable computing (DISC)
paradigm introduced by Randal Bryant [5]. HPC systems are advancing from Pflops performance in
current supercomputers to exascale systems in the future. HTC systems are primarily measured by
the number of user tasks that can be processed per unit time (i.e., throughput).
In this section, we identify major performance attributes for evaluating HPC systems. Then we
suggest attributes such as sustained speed, system efficiency, and availability for evaluating HPC
systems. HTC systems are evaluated in terms of both throughput and Quality of Service (QoS). We
study the workload characterization method for performance prediction of grid or cloud systems.
Finally, we present some benchmark performance results based on trace experiments conducted at
Tsinghua University in China and cloud benchmark experiments at Indiana University.


===== page 585 =====
562 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
9.2.1 Review of Science and Research Clouds
There has been substantial investigation of clouds for research applications and we surveyed the
types of applications that were suitable in Section 6.2.6. We have reviewed some of the research
cloud software being developed. Here we focus on infrastructure used for research in and use of
cloud computing. Interestingly, although commercial clouds have expanded rapidly, this has not
occurred for clouds used for research. These remain smaller than both their commercial counterparts
and the large supercomputers found in the TeraGrid introduced in Chapter 7.
9.2.1.1 FutureGrid [30]
FutureGrid, shown in Figure 9.8, is a NSF project funded as an experimental component of
TeraGrid and designed around the concept of Grid’5000. FutureGrid is led by Indiana University
(hardware, architecture, core software, support) in partnership with Purdue University (HTC hard-
ware), the San Diego Supercomputer Center at the University of California, San Diego (hardware,
INCA, monitoring), the University of Chicago/Argonne National Labs (hardware, Nimbus), the
University of Florida (hardware, VINE, education, and outreach), the University of Southern
California Information Science Institute (Pegasus workflow software to manage experiments), the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville (benchmarking), the University of Texas at Austin/Texas
Advanced Computing Center (hardware, portal), the University of Virginia (interoperability, grid
software), and the Center for Information Services and GWT-TUD from Technische Universtität
Dresden (VAMPIR software).
To GEANT
Dresden, Grid5000,
other European grids
Internet 2l NID
TeraGrid
Core
router
UC
1 1×
0G
UC: 7TF IBM 672 cores
1×10G
1×
P
10
U
G IU PU: 4TF Dell 384 cores
IU: 11TF IBM 1024 cores
LA
1×10 G 1×1G 7
˜5
T
T
F
F
C
D
ra
a
y
ta
6
/M
84
e m
co
o
r
r
e
y
s
1×10G Intensive TTBD
UCSD ˜512 cores
UCSD: 7TF IBM 672 cores
TACC TACC: 12TF Dell 1152 cores
UF UF: 3TF IBM 256 cores
FIGURE 9.8
FutureGriddistributedsystemtestbedacrosstheU.S.continent[30].
(CourtesyofJudyQiu[30])


===== page 586 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 563
Although it is an infrastructure project, it involves significant system development to support its
goals. FutureGrid is not a production system, but rather an environment supporting a flexible devel-
opment and testing platform for middleware and application users looking at interoperability, func-
tionality, and performance issues. FutureGrid will make it possible for researchers to conduct
experiments by submitting an experiment plan that is then executed via a sophisticated workflow
engine, preserving the provenance and state information necessary to allow reproducibility.
The testbed includes a geographically distributed set of heterogeneous computing systems, a
data management system that will hold both metadata and a growing library of software images,
and a dedicated network allowing isolatable, secure experiments. The testbed will support
VM-based environments, as well as native operating systems for experiments aimed at minimizing
overhead and maximizing performance. The project partners are integrating existing open source
software packages to create an easy-to-use software environment that supports the instantiation,
execution, and recording of grid and cloud computing experiments.
One of the goals of FutureGrid is to understand the behavior and utility of cloud computing
approaches. Researchers can measure the overhead of cloud technology by requesting linked experi-
mentsonbothvirtualandbare-metalsystems.Further,itoffersaricheducationandteachingplatform
foradvancedcyberinfrastructureclasses.Inthisregard,itwillbuildtutorialsonsupportedsoftwareand
offerasuiteofappliances(customizedVM-basedimages)supportingonlinelaboratoriessuchasbasic
gridandparallelcomputing.Figure9.9showsthesoftwarestackdevelopedintheFutureGridproject.
Further, particular classes can be granted time on FutureGrid for development of curricula
requiring privileges and system destruction capabilities that are hard to grant on conventional pro-
duction systems. FutureGrid offers seven distinct systems (clusters) of about 5,000 cores with differ-
ent optimizations. It also has a dedicated network (except to the Alamo system in Texas) allowing
security isolation and use of a dedicated network impairment device. Clouds provide great flexibil-
ity by building environments on top of hypervisors. FutureGrid follows a different route by dynami-
cally provisioning software as needed onto “bare metal.”
AsofNovember2010,“rebooting”anodeofFutureGridtakesaboutfourminutes[15].Theuser
canchoosefromavarietyofdifferentimagestoprovisionhertestenvironment.Figure9.9showsthe
software stack developed in the FutureGrid project. The images need careful security review
and currently include choices at different hypervisor levels (Xen, KVM), operating systems (Linux,
Windows), cloud environments (Nimbus, Eucalyptus, OpenNebula), middleware (gLite, Unicore,
Globus), programming paradigms (MPI, OpenMP, Hadoop, Dryad), and specialized capability such
asdistributedsharedmemoryfromScaleMP.
FutureGrid expects available images to increase as users build new and interesting environments
and deposit them in the library. Figure 9.9 shows the FutureGrid software stack. Key components
include portal interfaces; monitoring capability (INCA, Power [greenIT]); the Experiment Manager,
a new feature allowing reproducibility of execution scenarios; image generation and repository fea-
ture; VINE intercloud networking (virtual clusters built with virtual networks); a performance
library; RAIN or Runtime Adaptable InsertioN Service which schedules and deploys images; and
security features including use of isolated network as well as authentication and authorization.
9.2.1.2 Grid’5000 [35]
The Grid’5000 distributed system links nine sites in France as shown in Figure 7.8. Recently, Porto
Alegre,Brazil,wasaddedasatenthsite.Grid’5000hasmorethan5,000coresspreadover1,500nodes.


===== page 587 =====
564 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
FutureGrid user interfaces FG developer and
administrator interfaces
Portal
Portal
Commandline interfaces
Commandline interfaces
API
FG core services and software - stratosphere
Experiment Education support
management and tools
Performance
Image management
services and tools
Information
RAIN
services and tools
Network management Account management
Security
User and FG supported software usable in
experiments e.g., Globus, MPL, Hadoop, Dryad
FG middleware services and software FG support
services and software
Inca Vine
Ticket system
Pegasus Nimbus
SWE tools
Moab Eucalyptus
FG dev & support
FG core resources
resources
FIGURE 9.9
TheFutureGridsoftwarestack.
(CourtesyofJudyQiu[30])
Ithasbeenusedinavarietyofcomputerscienceresearchprojectsincludingcloudandgridcomputing
andgreenITwithbothsoftwaresystemsandperformancegoals.Grid’5000aimsatprovidingahighly
reconfigurable,controllable,andmonitoredexperimentalplatformtoitsusers.Workexploresalllevels,
including application, programming environment, application runtime, grid, cloud, P2P middleware,
operatingsystem,andnetwork.


===== page 588 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 565
9.2.1.3 Magellan [7]
MagellanisthelargestoftheresearchcloudsandissituatedattwoU.S.DepartmentofEnergysites:
Argonne[6]andtheNationalEnergyResearchScientificComputingCenter(NERSC)inCalifornia.
Eachconsistsofamedium-sizedclusterandstoragefacilities.TheNERSCsystemhasmorethan700
nodesandabout6,000cores,whileArgonnehasmorethan500nodesand4,000cores.Thesystems
areaddressingawidevarietyofresearchissues,includingthefollowing:
(cid:129) Comparing cloud performance and traditional cluster and supercomputing environments for
scientific applications. Of particular interest are applications currently running on local/
departmental clusters, or midrange applications that do not require more than 1,000 cores.
(cid:129) Testingsolidstate(flash)storagefordata-intensiveapplications.Flashstorageofferssubstantially
increased bandwidth and IOPS (I/O operation rate), and decreased latency, especially for read-
intensiveapplications.
(cid:129) Exploring the portability of applications to cloud systems, and in particular, looking at
MapReduce.
(cid:129) Providing portals on clouds to offer easier access to applications, databases, or automated
workflows.
(cid:129) Testing alternative resourcing models. For example, where availability is crucial, a virtual private
cluster could guarantee access to particular research groups for specific periods of time.
(cid:129) Understanding which scientific applications and user communities are best suited for cloud
computing.
(cid:129) Understanding the deployment and support issues required to build large science clouds. Is it
cost-effective and practical to operate science clouds? How could commercial clouds be
leveraged?
(cid:129) Determining how existing cloud software meets the needs of science and whether extending or
enhancing current cloud software improves utility.
(cid:129) Determining how well cloud computing supports data-intensive scientific applications.
(cid:129) Determining the challenges in addressing security for a virtualized cloud environment.
9.2.1.4 Open Cirrus [64]
This is a broad consortium of some 14 partners exploring cloud computing. The quite powerful test-
bed consists of more than 600 nodes at four major sites: KIT (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology),
the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, HP Labs in Palo Alto, California, and the BigData
cluster at Intel Research in Pittsburgh. The Open Cirrus testbed is designed to support research into
the design, provisioning, and management of services at a global, multidata-center scale.
The open nature of the testbed is designed to encourage research into all aspects of service and
data-center management. In addition, Open Cirrus aims to foster a collaborative community around
the testbed, providing ways to share tools, lessons, and best practices, and ways to benchmark and
compare alternative approaches to service management at data-center scale.
9.2.1.5 Open Cloud Testbed [36]
The Open Cloud Consortium (OCC) is a member-driven organization that supports the development
of standards for cloud computing and frameworks for interoperating between clouds, develops
benchmarks for cloud computing, and supports reference implementations for cloud computing.


===== page 589 =====
566 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
The OCC also manages a testbed for cloud computing, the Open Cloud Testbed, and operates cloud
computing infrastructure to support scientific research, called Open Science Data Cloud, with an
emphasis on data-intensive computing. As of November 2010, the Open Cloud Testbed includes
sites at Chicago (two), California (La Jolla, California), and John Hopkins University, with a total
of 250 nodes and 1,000 cores.
9.2.1.6 Science Clouds [76]
Science Clouds is an open cloud federation providing compute cycles in the cloud for scientific
communities exploring the use of Nimbus. The infrastructure federates sites across Europe and the
United States. As of November 2010, it consists of the Nimbus Cloud at the University of Chicago,
Stratus at the University of Florida, Wispy at Purdue University, and some machines in the Czech
Republic.
9.2.1.7 Sky Computing [43]
This project is aligned with Science Clouds and, like the European Reservoir project, is designed to
federate multiple clouds into a single resource. Linking separate clouds together can help scalability
(increasing the number of resources), but also improves fault tolerance. The federation also supports
the special case of a hybrid cloud—two clouds, one private and one public. Sky Computing has
been developed to extend Nimbus (see Section 6.6.1) to support multiple distinct clouds.
One good example of the Sky Computing project is a demonstration that showed the bioinfor-
matics program BLAST controlled by Hadoop running on 1,000 cores in six different sites: three in
the United States on FutureGrid (discussed earlier) and three on Grid’5000 [5] in Europe. This dis-
tributed federation was enabled by Nimbus for cloud management, offering VM provisioning and
contextualization services, from the University of Florida to enable all-to-all communication among
multiple clouds, and Hadoop for parallel fault-tolerant execution of BLAST. Network virtualization
is also supported in Reservoir [22].
9.2.1.8 Venus-C [79]
Venus-C is a European project exploring the applicability of cloud computing in areas such as
building structure analysis, 3D architecture rendering, prediction of marine species population, risk
prediction for wildfires, metagenomics, system biology, and drug development. The project explores
both Azure (Windows platforms) and Eucalyptus-based infrastructure at two European HPC centers:
the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH, Sweden) and the Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC,
Spain). The project will develop interoperability tools between different clouds for various
applications.
9.2.2 Data-Intensive Scalable Computing (DISC)
As elaborated in previous chapters, we live in an era of data explosion. In 2007, Randal Bryant was
among those who called attention to the increasing demand for data-intensive scalable computing.
In this section, we extract some observations he made and compare them to the potential of data-
center-based cloud computing.


===== page 590 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 567
9.2.2.1 Big Data Sources
In today’s data-driven world, huge databases are generated from science in astronomy, genomics,
natural languages, and seismic modeling, among other applications. In addition, scanned books,
newspapers, and historical documents are creating a data ocean. In commerce, corporate sales, stock
market transactions, census data, and airline traffic data all demand the handling of large data sets
on a daily basis. Other good examples come from the areas of entertainment and medicine. Two
sources, according to Bryant, are Wal-Mart and Sloan Digital Sky, as discussed in Example 9.5.
Example 9.5 Wal-Mart Data Warehouse and Sloan Digital Sky Survey [5]
The first example of big data sources comes from the global operations of Wal-Mart. Wal-Mart has 6,000
stores with supply chains involving more than 10,000 manufacturers. Each day, Wal-Mart sells 267 million
items. HP helped Wal-Mart to build data centers to handle 4 petabytes of data daily. Wal-Mart needs to
perform DISC for data mining and management of all its supply chains, understanding market trends, and
formulating pricingstrategies.
Thesecond examplecomesfrom the SloanDigital SkySurvey. Itstelescope,in theNew Mexico Obser-
vatory, captures 200 GB of image data per day. Its latest data set consists of 10 TB of data on 287 million
objects in outer space. Sloan uses SkyServer to provide SQL access in DISC-like data processing
continuously.
To build DISC systems to handle the oceans of data in both examples, one must solve the skinny
processing pipe problem. Use of many-core GPUs has created a possible solution to exploit massive
data-level parallelism in these DISC applications. Cloud computing may be slow compared with super-
computers, but massive parallelism is achieved through the use of large numbers of data centers
collectively.
9.2.2.2 DISC Systems versus Supercomputers
Table 9.4 summarizes four technical differences between DISC systems and conventional super-
computers. In general, supercomputers are essentially used in batch mode and it is difficult to tune
a supercomputer due to limited user control. Heavy data movement or I/O activities exist when
using supercomputers. It is rather challenging to optimize program execution on a supercomputer.
The major advantage of supercomputers lies in their sustained raw speed if everything is put
in order.
On the other hand, DISC systems are HTC data-center clusters which have all the advantages of
server clusters we discussed in previous chapters. In other words, DISC systems are much better in
terms of satisfying a large number of simultaneous users with a high task throughput rate. Data cen-
ters can eliminate all single points of failure. Therefore, they are more reliable and highly available.
Above all, DISC systems are more cost-effective or time/space-efficient for small users. They can
handle distributed computing applications using the cloud service model. Figure 9.10 show the dis-
tinctions between the two supercomputing paradigms. The advantages of using the DISC architec-
ture to satisfy HTC applications in distributing systems or cloud data centers are obvious from this
comparison.


===== page 591 =====
568 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
Table 9.4 DISC Systems versusSupercomputers
Data-IntensiveScalable
Features ConventionalSupercomputers Computing(DISC)
System AnHPCsystembywhichdatais AnHTCdata-centerclusterwhich
architecture retrievedfromremotesitesandbrought collectsandmaintainsdata.
intothesystemforexecution.Heavy Computationcollocatedwithstoragefor
datamovementoverhead. fasteraccess.Nodatamovement
overhead.
Programming Machine-dependentprogramswrittenat Machine-independentapplication
models averylowlevel.Usefewersoftware programsondata.Useruntimesystem
tools;needspecialiststooptimize. controlstooptimizeexecutionthrough
loadbalancing,etc.
Systemaccess Mainmachineforbatchprocessing Interactiveaccesswithprioritycontrol
andusemodel whenresourcesareready.Usesoffline anduserinterventionoverlargenumber
visualizationatremotesite. ofuserssimultaneously.
Reliabilityissues Brittlesystemswithwhichtorecover Flexibleerrordetectionandrecovery.
frommostrecentcheckpoint.Must Useredundancytechniquestoenter
bringdownsystemformaintenance. gracefuldegradedoperationsincaseof
failure.
CourtesyofRandalBryant[5].
Application
Application
programs
programs
Machine-independent
Software
programming model
packages
Runtime
Machine-dependent system
programming model
Hardware Hardware
(a) Conventional supercomputer (b) A DISC system
FIGURE 9.10
Programmer’sperspectivesofDISCsystemsagainstconventionalsupercomputers.
(CourtesyofRandalBryant[5],ReprintedwithPermission)
9.2.3 Performance Metrics for HPC/HTC Systems
HPC performance has been well defined over the years. The most popular metrics used are Gflops
and Tflops in the past, Pflops on top systems now, and Eflops for the future. Parallel benchmarking
programs are available to evaluate HPC systems in batch processing of a large-scale problem.
Well-known benchmark programs include the Linpack Benchmark, NAS, Splash, and Parkbench
[41]. On the other hand, HTC performance on business servers, clusters, data centers, and cloud


===== page 592 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 569
systems is much more complex a problem to evaluate because the systems are used by many clients
simultaneously.
Thus, HTC performance is attributed to many orthogonal factors. Some of them are measurable
and some are not. The basic assumption is that many (millions or more) independent users may use
the shared resources in the cloud or data centers simultaneously. The goal is to satisfy as many con-
current users as possible, even if each user program is a simple web service, social contact, or sim-
ple cloud storage. In this section, we attempt to present some performance evaluations and QoS
assessment models for both HPC and HTC systems.
9.2.3.1 Basic Performance Attributes
The performance models applied to evaluate MPPs, data-center clusters, and virtualized clouds
could be very different. To fit the layered structure of the cloud computing paradigm, the perfor-
mance metrics of IaaS serve as a basis to model PaaS performance. Similarly, the attributes applic-
able to model PaaS performance serve as a foundation to evaluate SaaS performance. A good
model should be able to cover all the layers of computing services. The model is generic in the
sense that it applies to various cloud platforms under different workload distributions. To assess
QoS in cloud services, the impacts on the top layer (SaaS) should remain transparent to the lower
layers (PaaS and IaaS). A cloud platform should be built to serve many users simultaneously.
Therefore, multitasking is a necessity to assess distributed system performance. Five basic per-
formance metrics are introduced in this section: namely system throughput, multitasking scalability,
availability measure, data security, and cost-effectiveness. This analytical model offers a first-order
approximation to model the performance of any HPC or HTC system, including elastic clouds. One
can always add more performance attributes to expand the model from the user’s perspective to
cover more dimensions or those concerns by service providers. In other words, refined performance
models could be extended from basic attributes to include program behavior, environmental
demand, QoS, and cost-effectiveness.
9.2.3.2 System Throughput and Efficiency
In general, the system throughput of a distributed system or a cloud platform measures the number
of jobs that can be done per unit of time. The throughput measure is attributed to several key fac-
tors that affect the total execution time (T ) of all jobs processed in a given time window. First,
total
we have to examine all component times in T . Each job submitted may experience an initiation
total
time to acquire resources. This overhead time includes the boot time of all machine instances and
the scheduling time of incoming user jobs. The type of the application program limits horizontal
scalability. In general, the overhead can be attributed to five components: infrastructure initiation
delay, resource provisioning delay, interjob communication delay, OS overhead, and loading appli-
cation software overhead.
The OS and software overheads remain constant in running different jobs. The other three time
factors may vary with problem size and system management policies. For simplicity in analysis, we
lump all five time factors into a single overhead time kT , where T is their sum averaged over
o o
many jobs running in a fixed time interval. The constant k is a platform-dependent coefficient that
varies with specific system configurations. This overhead applies to all three system models pre-
sented in this book. Let T (n, m) be the effective execution time to complete n independent jobs in
e
a cloud platform, where m accounts for the number of machine instances in a given system


===== page 593 =====
570 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
configuration. These machine instances could be cluster nodes (or processor cores) if physical ser-
vers are used, or VM counts if a virtualized cloud is used.
We compute the total job execution time (or makespan) with T = kT +T (n, m). Then the
total o e
system throughput (π) is defined by:
π =n/T =n/½kT +T ðn,mÞ(cid:2) (9.1)
total o e
Intheidealcase,theoverheadkT isassumedtobeverysmallorsimplyzero,comparedwiththe
o
magnitude of the execution time T . Hence, the ideal throughput is simply measured by n/T (n, m).
e e
Thesystemefficiency(α)isdefinedbynormalizedthroughputasfollows:
α=π/½n/T ðn,mÞ(cid:2)=T ðn,mÞ/½kT +T ðn,mÞ(cid:2) (9.2)
e e o e
System efficiency represents the effective utilization of all provisioned resources in a system.
Note that the parameters n and m in the expression T (n, m) vary with the workload (user number),
e
system size (m), the parallel and distributed computing model applied.
9.2.3.3 Multitasking Scalability
Multitasking implies the use of a system to handle many jobs simultaneously or concurrently. Sys-
tem services should be able to scale both horizontally across the machine or cluster size and verti-
cally from applications to middleware, runtime and OS support, and hardware. The ability to scale
resources dynamically is crucial to provide elastic resources. By horizontal scalability, we mean to
increase cloud resources of the same type. For example, the number of VM instances offers such a
measure in a cloud.
Vertical scalability means the increase in performance due to adding more resources along the
service layers. For simplicity in illustrating scalability, we concentrate on horizontal scalability.
However, we consider both scale-up and scale-down situations. Sometimes, scaling down could be
more efficient than scaling up. The potential benefit of a system or cloud platform is largely attribu-
ted to being able to scale resources up and down dynamically, on demand.
We define the multitasking scalability (β) as follows. Recall that m is the number of machine
instances and n is the total number of user jobs (or tasks) being processed. In general, we have
n >> m, because n could be in millions and m only in the hundreds. The upper bound on scalabil-
ity is roughly indicated by the ratio n/m, which is the average number of user jobs executed per
machine instance, when all overhead times T are ignored. The higher the overhead time, the lower
o
the scalability. Of course, one can increase the magnitude of m to approach n to get a 100 percent
scalability. In reality, achieving a scalability β of around 20 percent is already very good in a real-
life server cluster.
β=ðn/mÞα=ðn/mÞT ðn,mÞ/½kT +T ðn,mÞ(cid:2) (9.3)
e o e
9.2.3.4 System Availability
System availability (γ) refers to the percentage of time the system is up and running normally. This
percentage reflects the effects of downtime after unexpected failures and scheduled maintenance for
software upgrades. Recall the availability definition given in Example 1.5 in Chapter 1; system
availability is defined by the ratio of MTTF (mean time to failure) to the sum of MTTF and MTTR


===== page 594 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 571
(mean time to repair). That definition applies to all systems (clusters, MPPs, grids, and clouds) stu-
died in this book.
High availability (HA) specifies the performance level of a system with controlled downtime
through quick recovery from failure. The term “continuous availability” (CA) refers an operational
level with almost no failure. Generally speaking, system availability should be the responsibility of
the providers. Usually, availability is maintained sufficiently high with at least five 9s, meaning that
with 99.999 percent of uptime (at most, five minutes of downtime per year) the system can provide
services. Of course, an HA cluster could demand 99.99999 percent availability, meaning only three
seconds of downtime per year. In general, that would be very expensive to achieve in a real-life
machine environment.
9.2.3.5 Security Index
We assessed the vulnerability of commercial cloud platforms in Sections 6.3 and 6.5. Availability is
affected by platform architecture, service models applied, system vulnerability, and resilience to net-
work attacks. Google has hundreds of data centers and more than half a million servers. The plat-
form consists of the server cluster, GFS, and data centers. We discussed security issues in more
detail in Section 6.5. Here we summarize important factors affecting cloud security in a dynamic
cloud environment.
Cloud security is attributed to user confidentiality, data integrity, access control, firewalls, IDSes,
defense capability against viruses or worm attacks, reputation systems, copyright protection, data
lock-in, APIs, data-center security policies, trust negotiation, and security auditing services.
We suggest fine-grained access control at the file level in data centers. Trust among resource sites
can be negotiated with nonconflicting security policies. To secure elastic resources, the reputation
system should be designed to safeguard scattered resource sites and data centers. The resource site
security index (δ) and user-access records should be maintained through periodic auditing.
9.2.3.6 Cost Effectiveness
This refers to the estimate of an effective scale of economy achievable by a given system. The fol-
lowing cost model for clouds is a rough estimation. This model considers costs by both the cloud
service provider and the data-center owner. The provider must pay the data-center owner for the
resources used even if they belong to the same company. Regardless of the cloud service model
applied, the cost of cloud usage is primarily determined by the hours used.
We denote c as the hourly charge to the user by the provider and h as the number of service
hours provided to end users. The total income of the provider from user payment of the service is
calculated by Cost = hc. The total cost the provider paid to the data center is estimated by Cost =
p d
h(d/u), where d is the hourly charge by the data center and u is the utilization rate of the data-center
resources. This rate often falls in the range of 0.6 to 0.8 as estimated by the Berkeley Group. The
cost-effectiveness (μ) of the cloud service is a measure for assessing the profit margin by the service
provider.
μ=ðCost −Cost Þ/Cost =ðhc−hd/uÞ/ðhd/uÞ=cu/d−1 (9.4)
p d d
As a numeric example, given c = $3/hour, d = $1/hour, and u = 60 percent in using Amazon
EC2, this means the provider has a profit margin of μ = 80 percent on top of its cost if the data-
center resources are 60 percent utilized. This cost model gives a very rough estimate of the profit


===== page 595 =====
572 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
margin by the provider. If the provider charges the user a reduced hourly rate of $2/hour, the profit
will be reduced to only 20 percent of the cost. In general, c is set to be greater than d by a large
margin.
9.2.4 Quality of Service in Cloud Computing
We present the cumulative performance of a cloud platform by a compound metric, called quality
of cloud services (QoCS) and denoted by θ. This metric measures the overall quality of the cloud
service, regardless of the particular service models applied. We use a five-dimensional Kiviat graph to
plot the aggregated cloud performance or to quantify the QoCS graphically. Each Kiviat graph has
five orthogonal dimensions, representing the five performance attributes we introduced earlier. The
Kiviat graph provides a holistic view of the capabilities of the cloud service model. The shaded area
of the Kiviat graph represents the cumulative strength or quality of the cloud service being provided.
Specifically, the larger the shaded area A on the Kiviat graph for a given user application
shaded
runningonthecloudplatform,thebettertheQoCS, θ,ofthecloudplatformbeingtestedforagiven
cloudapplication. Thescale and range of these five dimensions are specified by the template Kiviat
graphinFigure9.11(a).LetA betheidealoperatingareaofthepentagonintheKiviatgraph.
pentagon
Thescaleonalldimensionsisnormalizedtobe1.Inotherwords,themaximumradiusofthepenta-
gonissettobe1alongalldimensions.Allfivefractionalmeasuresarescaledfrom0to1.Thescale
of 0 is located at the center of the perfect pentagon, meaning the lowest values of the five perfor-
mance parameters (α, β, γ, δ, μ). The parameter value of 1 means the highest performance in each
dimensionofthemeasure.WeformallydefinedtheQoCSbythefollowingratio:
θ=A /A (9.5)
shaded pentagon
The lower value of the θ measure means poor performance. The higher value of θ toward 1
implieshigherperformance.Figures9.11(b–d)showthecorrespondingKiviatgraphsforthreecloud
services hypothetically running on three cloud platforms. This is based on the aforementioned ana-
lytical modeling of cloud performance. Itwould be interesting to validate the analytical results with
real-lifebenchmarkexperimentsonthecloudplatformsfromAmazon,Google,andSalesforce.com.
Example 9.6 Performance Analysis of Three Cloud Services
Three cloud service models are evaluated analytically by projected hypothetical runs with three known
cloud applications. One can run Amazon EC2 to test IaaS performance. The SaaS test runs on GAE with
Salesforce.com’s CRM software. The Hadoop application is tested on IBM Blue Cloud to project PaaS per-
formance. Theseprojected runsareundertwoextremecloudconditions:Onecorrespondstothebestsce-
nario with HA and high security assurance, and the other corresponds to the worst case of low availability
and insecurity.The remaining threedimensionsassume attributevaluesby common-senseestimates.
The small pentagon areas in Figure 9.11(b) and 9.11(d) resulted from the worst-case experiments. In
Figure 9.11(c), the EC2 application is tested on the AWS platform under the best platform conditions with
high efficiency, continuous availability, highly secured data centers, and cost-effective returns. The Kiviat
graph in Figure 9.11(c) reports the best results with a much larger pentagon area. These plots demon-
strate the relative strengths and weaknesses of the three cloud service models in terms of the five attri-
butes (α, β, γ,δ,μ).


===== page 596 =====
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 573
Efficiency (α) α
1
0.5 0.333
Cost (μ) Scalability (β) μ β
0 0.8 0.167
0.35
Security (δ) Availability (γ) δ 0.9 γ
(a) Kiviat graph (template) with five attributes (b) SaaS with low efficiency, scalability, and security
α α
0.667
0.545
0.667
μ β μ
β
0.85 0.4 0.273
0.25
δ 0.55 γ δ 0.9 γ
.99999
(c) PaaS under very good running conditions (d) IaaS under poor running conditions but with HA
FIGURE9.11
KiviatgraphsshowingtheQoCSofthreecloudservicemodelsunderassumedrunningconditionson
fiveattributedimensions.
(CourtesyofK.HwangandS.Kulkarni,USC2009)
Table 9.5 Relative Performance of Three ComputingCloud ServiceModels Appliedto anEC2
Application under TwoExtreme Security andAvailability Conditions
QoCSofCloud QoCSofCloud
Servicesθ, RankingOrder Services,θ, RankingOrder
underWorst- underWorst- underBest- underBest-
ServiceModel CaseScenario CaseScenario CaseScenario CaseScenario
IaaS 19.3661% 3 59.7055% 1
PaaS 25.5026% 1 54.4187% 2
SaaS 22.2344% 2 52.1941% 3
The results shown in Table 9.5 are estimated values of QoCS and the relative rankings of the three
cloud service models under optimistic versus pessimistic assumptions. The pessimistic QoCS results indi-
cate that all three service models have demonstrate about 30 percent of their maximum performance. The
QoCS of the IaaS is very low compared with those for the PaaS and SaaS models shown in Figure 9.11(b)
and 9.11 (c), respectively. This happens becauseof the scalability constraints and lower cost-effectiveness
values assumed. The QoCS of the PaaS and SaaS models are fairly close to each other, with the PaaS
model beingsecureand efficient andSaaSbeingcost-effective.


===== page 597 =====
574 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
In an optimistic analysis, the QoCS of the three cloud service models are in the range of 50 percent to
60 percent. The IaaS model performs better than the PaaS and SaaS models. This is attributed primarily
to improved efficiency, scalability, and security measures. The PaaS and IaaSmodels have similar levels of
performance. The PaaS model is slightly higher in performance than the IaaS model, thanks to significant
improvements by providers of PaaS in the areas of efficiency and scalability. However, the ranking of IaaS,
PaaS, and SaaS models varies with specific applications. Benchmark experiments are needed to rank
cloudperformance.
9.2.5 Benchmarking MPI, Azure, EC2, MapReduce, and Hadoop
Several detailed benchmarking studies of cloud system have been conducted [23–29] on HPC appli-
cations. Some of these conclusions may be a little misleading as they use technologies such as mes-
sage-passing interface (MPI), which is usually unsuitable for clouds, rather than, say, MapReduce,
whose features we discussed in Chapter 6. Other studies [15,30–38] have taken a more focused
look at scientific problems which, as we discussed in Section 6.2.6, work well with clouds. Some
of the latter results on the performance of Twister were discussed in Section 6.2.2 and are not
repeated here.
9.2.5.1 Competitive Cloud Performance
Our understanding is that clouds offer competitive performance and pricing for applications and
programming paradigms that are well suited to cloud environments. For these cases, one benefits
from the obvious utility computing feature of clouds, and for PaaS, one can also benefit from plat-
form features such as Azure Table/Amazon SimpleDB which are not available on traditional HPC
clusters. Performance-relevant problems with clouds include the bandwidth and cost of transmitting
data to them; performance degradations in I/O which impact latency and bandwidth of MPI; and
consequences of virtualization that negatively impact the affinity between compute and storage and
between different compute instances [39]. Traditional large-scale simulations—often requiring low-
latency, high-bandwidth communications and clever data decomposition schemes—perform very
poorly on clouds.
The costs of various implementations were examined [41] on Amazon EC2 with the conclusions
that compute costs dominated over storage but that costs are sensitive to particular Amazon instance
types (Table 6.13). This sensitivity appears in many studies and suggests that the first step in any
major cloud activity is to optimize the instance types used. Another astronomy application [42]
looked at Amazon EC2 for the Nearby Supernova Factory (SNfactory) analysis environment that
relies upon a complex pipeline of serial processes that execute various image processing algorithms
in parallel on ~10 terabytes of data. This paper found that careful attention was needed to use sto-
rage effectively on EC2 while the original Linux cluster application needed modification to cope
with failures present on clouds. Note that cloud-optimized environments such as MapReduce have
failure tolerance built in.
9.2.5.2 MPI versus MapReduce Performance
Now we describe a set of performance measurements from the SALSA group at Indiana University
comparingMPI,MapReduce,andmaster-workerapproachesoncloudsandtraditionalplatformsusing


===== page 598 =====
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
15 20 25 30
Number of cores
Linux and Windows [22,39]; further details may be found in papers from this group. Consider the
performanceofrunningthegenerativetopographicmapping(GTM)interpolationalgorithmonvarious
EC2sizes.ThepurposeisfordimensionreductiontoanalyzetheNIHPubChemdatasetof26.4million
datapointsin166dimensions.AzuretestsonvariableinstancesareshowninFigure9.12.
TheEC2testswereperformedonEC2Large,High-CPU-Extra-Large(HCXL),andHigh-Memory-
Quadruple-Extra-Large(HM4XL) instancesseparately.HM4XLandHCXLinstancesuseeightcores
perinstancewhile“large”instancesusetwocoresperinstance.TheMapReduceimplementationsliein
themiddle.Thelowefficiencyisduetomemorybandwidtheffectsonindividualnodes,whichismost
pronounced for DryadLINQ runs on 16 core systems, whereas Hadoop systems had eight cores per
node.Thisexampleillustratesthatthecloudinstancechoicedoesaffectthescalableperformance.
9.2.5.3 MapReduce on Clouds and Bare Metal
Finally, we look at four different implementations of MapReduce [38] on the SWG computation
introduced earlier (Figure 9.13). We compare MapReduce developed on Azure by the SALSA
group with Hadoop on bare metal and two Amazon implementations: the “official” elastic MapRe-
duce and Hadoop implemented on Amazon instances. The largest effect is a trivial one—the C#
implementation is slower than the Java distance computation. This is removed by dividing out the
single computation performance.
Amazon EC2 is typically six times slower than a mid-range Linux cluster, and 20 times slower
than a modern HPC system. However, the hardware, software, and interconnect on the EC2 cloud
platform limit its performance in terms of raw speed. Clouds are very successful in business appli-
cations. In the scientific arena, data-intensive problems have achieved significant success on clouds,
for two reasons. First, they often have the closely coupled structure that is well supported in clouds.
Second, these are typically “new applications” which are attractive to build from scratch with
ycneiciffe
lellaraP
9.2 Performance of Distributed Systems and the Cloud 575
Azure EC2 HCXL
EC2 HM4XL Hadoop
EC2 large DryadLINQ
35 40 45 50
FIGURE9.12
Cloudperformancevariationwithrespecttothenumberofvirtualcoresused[19].


===== page 599 =====
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
Azure MR
1500
Amazon EMR
1000
Hadoop on EC2
500
Hadoop on bare metal
0
64×1024 96×1536 128×2048 160×2560 192×3072
Num. of cores×Num. of blocks
programming models suited for clouds. Most of the current studies have looked at test kernels of a
problem, but we can highlight two papers that examine complete applications. Montage delivers
science-grade mosaics of the sky to a community composed of both professional and amateur
astronomers and can naturally be implemented as a service in the cloud.
9.3 ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE INTERNET OF THINGS
In ubiquitous computing, the Internet of Things (IoT) provides a network of sensor- or radio-
connecteddevicesthatcanbeuniquelyidentifiedandlocatedinthecyber-physicalspace.ThisIoTis
mostlywirelesslyconnectedasaself-configuringnetworkofradio-frequencytags,low-costsensors,
ore-labels. The conceptisattributed to originalauto-IDtracking in 1999. The term“IoT” combines
RFIDtechnologywithtoday’sIPv6-basedInternettechnology.Allthings(objects)haveIPaddresses,
which can be uniquely identified. The IP-identifiable objects are readable, recognizable, locatable,
addressable,and/orcontrollableviatheInternet,aidedbyRFID,WiFi,ZigBee,mobilenetworks,and
GPS. The IoTenablingtechnologiesare covered in this sectionfor object tagging, wirelesssensing,
andlocatingpositions.InterestingIoTapplicationsarepresentedinSection9.4.
9.3.1 The Internet of Things for Ubiquitous Computing
As introduced in Chapter 1, the IoT is a natural extension of the Internet. The foundation of the IoT
is radio-frequency identification (RFID). This enables the discovery of tagged objects and mobile
devices by browsing an IP address or searching for a database entry. Whereas RFID is a kind of
amoeba of the pervasive computing world, the IoT presents a vision of the future. In the nineteenth
century, computers learned to do as instructed. In the twentieth century, computers learned to think.
In the twenty-first century, computers want to learn how to perceive by sensing and understanding.
)s(
emiT
576 CHAPTER 9 Ubiquitous Clouds and the Internet of Things
FIGURE 9.13
RelativeSWGperformanceofMapReduceonfourcloudplatforms:AzureMR,AmazonEMR,Hadoopon
EC2,andHadooponbaremetal[19–22,67,68].


===== page 600 =====
9.3 Enabling Technologies for the Internet of Things 577
Everyday objects include not only electronic devices, but also objects such as humans, animals,
food, clothing, homes, vehicles, commodities, trees, hills, and landmarks. The IoT system could
greatly reduce the chances of a company running out of stock or wasting products, as all concerned
parties would know exactly what products are needed. Mislaid items and physical theft would be
affectedbythe factthatthelocationof anitemwould beknown toallparties.This demands thatall
objectsonEarthberadio-tagged,rangingfromamilkcartontoatruckcontainertoajumbojet.Com-
puters identify and manage all tagged objects in the same way humans do. This IoT system will
improveourqualityoflifeandmakesocietycleanerandmoresecure,convenient,andenjoyable.
9.3.1.1 Ubiquitous Computing
Ubiquitous computing is a post-desktop model of human-computer interaction in which information
processing is integrated into everyday objects and activities. For daily activities, people may engage
in using many pervasive devices simultaneously. They may not even be aware of the existence of
the interactive devices. Although the idea is simple, its application is difficult. If all objects in the
world were equipped with minuscule identifying devices, daily life on our planet could undergo a
major transformation.
The IoT cannot be realized without systems design and engineering, and user interfaces. Con-
temporary human-computer interaction models, whether command-line, menu-driven, or GUI-based,
are inappropriate and inadequate to meet ubiquitous computing demands. The natural IoT paradigm
appropriate to a ubiquitous computing world has yet to emerge. Contemporary devices that lend
support to ubiquitous computing include smartphones, tablet computers, sensor networks, RFID
tags, smart cards, GPS devices, and others.
9.3.1.2 Development of the Internet of Things
In 2005, the concept of the IoT entered the limelight. The IoT should be designed to connect the
world’s objects in a sensory manner. The approach is to tag things through RFID, feel things
through sensors and wireless networks, and think things by building embedded systems that interact
with human activities. A road map for IoT development is shown in Figure 9.14 to anticipate the
desired technology advances to make the IoT a reality in 25 years. In 2002, the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) called for the convergence of cutting-edge technologies including ubiqui-
tous computing and nanotechnology.
In April 2008, the U.S. National Intelligence Council published a report titled “Disruptive Civil
Technologies,” which also identified the IoT as a critical technology on U.S. interests out to 2025.
Quantitatively speaking, the IoT should be designed to encode 50 trillion to 100 trillion objects.
Moreover, the IoT should be designed to follow the movement of those objects. With today’s popu-
lation of more than 6 billion worldwide, that means every person is surrounded by 1,000 to 5,000
objects on a daily basis.
9.3.1.3 Enabling and Synergistic Technologies
Many technologies can be applied to build the IoT infrastructure and specific IoT systems for
special application domains. Supportive technologies are divided into two categories. Enabling
technologies build up the foundations of the IoT. Among the enabling technologies, tracking
(RFID), sensor networks, and GPS are critical. We will further illustrate these in Figure 9.19.
Synergistic technologies play supporting roles, as shown Table 9.6. For example, biometrics
