source: Books - all\DistributedSystems_Concepts&Design_Kindberg.pdf
method: pdf
sha256: 344831445ddb68b16909969a4597cb8100bea220a303757c5ef77e4173545585
pages:  1067
ocr:    1 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    300
----------------------------------------------------------------------
===== page 201 =====
EXERCISES 183
4.11 Write an algorithm in pseudo-code to describe deserialization of the serialized form
produced by the algorithm defined in Exercise 4.10. Hint: use reflection to create a class
from its name, to create a constructor from its parameter types and to create a new
instance of an object from the constructor and the argument values. page 162
4.12 Why can’t binary data be represented directly in XML, for example, by representing it
as Unicode byte values? XML elements can carry strings represented as base64. Discuss
the advantages or disadvantages of using this method to represent binary data.(cid:3)
page 164
4.13 Define a class whose instances represent remote object references. It should contain
information similar to that shown in Figure 4.13 and should provide access methods
needed by higher-level protocols (see request-reply in Chapter 5, for example). Explain
how each of the access methods will be used by that protocol. Give a justification for the
type chosen for the instance variable containing information about the interface of the
remote object. page 168
4.14 IP multicast provides a service that suffers from omission failures. Make a test kit,
possibly based on the program in Figure 4.14, to discover the conditions under which a
multicast message is sometimes dropped by one of the members of the multicast group.
The test kit should be designed to allow for multiple sending processes. page 170
4.15 Outline the design of a scheme that uses message retransmissions with IP multicast to
overcome the problem of dropped messages. Your scheme should take the following
points into account:
i) There may be multiple senders.
ii) Generally only a small proportion of messages are dropped.
iii) Recipients may not necessarily send a message within any particular time limit.
Assume that messages that are not dropped arrive in sender order. page 173
4.16 Your solution to Exercise 4.15 should have overcome the problem of dropped messages
in IP multicast. In what sense does your solution differ from the definition of reliable
multicast? page 173
4.17 Devise a scenario in which multicasts sent by different clients are delivered to two group
members in different orders. Assume that some form of message retransmission is in
use, but that messages that are not dropped arrive in sender order. Suggest how
recipients might remedy this situation. page 173
4.18 Revisit the Internet architecture as introduced in Chapter 3 (see Figures 3.12 and 3.14).
What impact does the introduction of overlay networks have on this architecture, and in
particular on the programmer’s conceptual view of the Internet? page 175
4.19 What are the main arguments for adopting a super node approach in Skype? page 177
4.20 As discussed in Section 4.6, MPI offers a number of variants of send including the
MPI_Rsend operation, which assumes the receiver is ready to receive at the time of
sending. What optimizations in implementation are possible if this assumption is correct
and what are the repercussions of this assumption being false? page 180


===== page 202 =====  [ocr]
This page intentionally left blank


===== page 203 =====
5
REMOTE INVOCATION
5.1 Introduction
5.2 Request-reply protocols
5.3 Remote procedure call
5.4 Remote method invocation
5.5 Case study: Java RMI
5.6 Summary
This chapter steps through the remote invocation paradigms introduced in Chapter 2
(indirect communication techniques are addressed in Chapter 6). The chapter starts by
examining the most primitive service, request-reply communication, which represents
relatively minor enhancements to the underlying interprocess communication primitives
discussed in Chapter 4. The chapter then continues by examining the two most prominent
remote invocation techniques for communication in distributed systems:
• The remote procedure call (RPC) approach extends the common programming
abstraction of the procedure call to distributed environments, allowing a calling
process to call a procedure in a remote node as if it is local.
• Remote method invocation (RMI) is similar to RPC but for distributed objects, with
added benefits in terms of using object-oriented programming concepts in
distributed systems and also extending the concept of an object reference to the
global distributed environments, and allowing the use of object references as
parameters in remote invocations.
The chapter also features Java RMI as a case study of the remote method invocation
approach (further insight can also be gained in Chapter 8, where we look at CORBA).
185


===== page 204 =====
186 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.1 Middleware layers
Applications, services
This
chapter
Remote invocation, indirect communication
(and Chapter 6)
Underlying interprocess communication primitives: Middleware
Sockets, message passing, multicast support, overlay networks layers
UDP and TCP
5.1 Introduction
This chapter is concerned with how processes (or entities at a higher level of abstraction
such as objects or services) communicate in a distributed system, examining, in
particular, the remote invocation paradigms defined in Chapter 2:
(cid:129) Request-reply protocols represent a pattern on top of message passing and support
the two-way exchange of messages as encountered in client-server computing. In
particular, such protocols provide relatively low-level support for requesting the
execution of a remote operation, and also provide direct support for RPC and
RMI, discussed below.
(cid:129) Theearliest and perhaps the best-known example of a more programmer-friendly
model was the extension of the conventional procedure call model to distributed
systems (the remote procedure call, or RPC, model), which allows client
programs to call procedures transparently in server programs running in separate
processes and generally in different computers from the client.
(cid:129) In the 1990s, the object-based programming model was extended to allow objects
in different processes to communicate with one another by means of remote
method invocation (RMI). RMI is an extension of local method invocation that
allows an object living in one process to invoke the methods of an object living in
another process.
Note that we use the term ‘RMI’ to refer to remote method invocation in a generic way
– this should not be confused with particular examples of remote method invocation
such as Java RMI.
Returning to the diagram first introduced in Chapter 4 (and reproduced in Figure
5.1), this chapter, together with Chapter 6, continues our study of middleware concepts
by focusing on the layer above interprocess communication. In particular, Sections 5.2
through 5.4 focus on the styles of communication listed above, with Section 5.5
providing a more complex case study, Java RMI.


===== page 205 =====
SECTION 5.2 REQUEST-REPLY PROTOCOLS 187
Figure 5.2 Request-reply communication
Client Server
Request
doOperation
• message getRequest
• select operation
(wait)
execute operation
• Reply
• message sendReply
(continuation)
5.2 Request-reply protocols
This form of communication is designed to support the roles and message exchanges in
typical client-server interactions. In the normal case, request-reply communication is
synchronous because the client process blocks until the reply arrives from the server. It
can also be reliable because the reply from the server is effectively an acknowledgement
to the client. Asynchronous request-reply communication is an alternative that may be
useful in situations where clients can afford to retrieve replies later – see Section 7.5.2.
The client-server exchanges are described in the following paragraphs in terms of
the send and receive operations in the Java API for UDP datagrams, although many
current implementations use TCP streams. A protocol built over datagrams avoids
unnecessary overheads associated with the TCP stream protocol. In particular:
(cid:129) Acknowledgements are redundant, since requests are followed by replies.
(cid:129) Establishing a connection involves two extra pairs of messages in addition to the
pair required for a request and a reply.
(cid:129) Flow control is redundant for the majority of invocations, which pass only small
arguments and results.
The request-replyprotocol • The protocol we describe here is based on a trio of
communication primitives, doOperation,getRequest and sendReply, as shown in Figure
5.2. This request-reply protocol matches requests to replies. It may be designed to
provide certain delivery guarantees. If UDP datagrams are used, the delivery guarantees
must be provided by the request-reply protocol, which may use the server reply message
as an acknowledgement of the client request message. Figure 5.3 outlines the three
communication primitives.
The doOperation method is used by clients to invoke remote operations. Its
arguments specify the remote server and which operation to invoke, together with
additional information (arguments) required by the operation. Its result is a byte array
containing the reply. It is assumed that the client calling doOperation marshals the


===== page 206 =====
188 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.3 Operations of the request-reply protocol
public byte[] doOperation (RemoteRef s, int operationId, byte[] arguments)
Sends a request message to the remote server and returns the reply.
The arguments specify the remote server, the operation to be invoked and the
arguments of that operation.
public byte[] getRequest ();
Acquires a client request via the server port.
public void sendReply (byte[] reply, InetAddress clientHost, int clientPort);
Sends the reply message reply to the client at its Internet address and port.
arguments into an array of bytes and unmarshals the results from the array of bytes that
is returned. The first argument of doOperation is an instance of the class RemoteRef,
which represents references for remote servers. This class provides methods for getting
the Internet address and port of the associated server. The doOperation method sends a
request message to the server whose Internet address and port are specified in the remote
reference given as an argument. After sending the request message, doOperation
invokes receive to get a reply message, from which it extracts the result and returns it to
the caller. The caller of doOperation is blocked until the server performs the requested
operation and transmits a reply message to the client process.
getRequest is used by a server process to acquire service requests, as shown in
Figure 5.3. When the server has invoked the specified operation, it then uses sendReply
to send the reply message to the client. When the reply message is received by the client
the original doOperation is unblocked and execution of the client program continues.
The information to be transmitted in a request message or a reply message is
shown in Figure 5.4. The first field indicates whether the message is a Request or a Reply
message. The second field, requestId,contains a message identifier. A doOperation in
the client generates a requestId for each request message, and the server copies these IDs
into the corresponding reply messages. This enables doOperation to check that a reply
message is the result of the current request, not a delayed earlier call. The third field is
a remote reference. The fourth field is an identifier for the operation to be invoked. For
example, the operations in an interface might be numbered 1, 2, 3, ... , if the client and
server use a common language that supports reflection, a representation of the operation
itself may be put in this field.
Figure 5.4 Request-reply message structure
messageType int (0=Request, 1= Reply)
requestId int
remoteReference RemoteRef
operationId int or Operation
arguments // array of bytes


===== page 207 =====
SECTION 5.2 REQUEST-REPLY PROTOCOLS 189
Messageidentifiers • Any scheme that involves the management of messages to
provide additional properties such as reliable message delivery or request-reply
communication requires that each message have a unique message identifier by which
it may be referenced. A message identifier consists of two parts:
1. a requestId, which is taken from an increasing sequence of integers by the sending
process;
2. an identifier for the sender process, for example, its port and Internet address.
The first part makes the identifier unique to the sender, and the second part makes it
unique in the distributed system. (The second part can be obtained independently – for
example, if UDP is in use, from the message received.)
When the value of the requestId reaches the maximum value for an unsigned
integer (for example, 232 – 1) it is reset to zero. The only restriction here is that the
lifetime of a message identifier should be much less than the time taken to exhaust the
values in the sequence of integers.
Failure modelof the request-reply protocol • If the three primitives doOperation,
getRequest and sendReply are implemented over UDP datagrams, then they suffer from
the same communication failures. That is:
(cid:129) They suffer from omission failures.
(cid:129) Messages are not guaranteed to be delivered in sender order.
In addition, the protocol can suffer from the failure of processes (see Section 2.4.2). We
assume that processes have crash failures. That is, when they halt, they remain halted –
they do not produce Byzantine behaviour.
To allow for occasions when a server has failed or a request or reply message is
dropped, doOperation uses a timeout when it is waiting to get the server’s reply
message. The action taken when a timeout occurs depends upon the delivery guarantees
being offered.
Timeouts • There are various options as to what doOperation can do after a timeout.
The simplest option is to return immediately from doOperation with an indication to the
client that the doOperation has failed. This is not the usual approach – the timeout may
have been due to the request or reply message getting lost and in the latter case, the
operation will have been performed. To compensate for the possibility of lost messages,
doOperation sends the request message repeatedly until either it gets a reply or it is
reasonably sure that the delay is due to lack of response from the server rather than to
lost messages. Eventually, when doOperation returns, it will indicate to the client by an
exception that no result was received.
Discardingduplicaterequestmessages • In cases when the request message is
retransmitted, the server may receive it more than once. For example, the server may
receive the first request message but take longer than the client’s timeout to execute the
command and return the reply. This can lead to the server executing an operation more
than once for the same request. To avoid this, the protocol is designed to recognize
successive messages (from the same client) with the same request identifier and to filter
out duplicates. If the server has not yet sent the reply, it need take no special action – it
will transmit the reply when it has finished executing the operation.


===== page 208 =====
190 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Lostreplymessages • If the server has already sent the reply when it receives a
duplicate request it will need to execute the operation again to obtain the result, unless
it has stored the result of the original execution. Some servers can execute their
operations more than once and obtain the same results each time. An idempotent
operation is an operation that can be performed repeatedly with the same effect as if it
had been performed exactly once. For example, an operation to add an element to a set
is an idempotent operation because it will always have the same effect on the set each
time it is performed, whereas an operation to append an item to a sequence is not an
idempotent operation because it extends the sequence each time it is performed. A server
whose operations are all idempotent need not take special measures to avoid executing
its operations more than once.
History • For servers that require retransmission of replies without re-execution of
operations, a history may be used. The term ‘history’ is used to refer to a structure that
contains a record of (reply) messages that have been transmitted. An entry in a history
contains a request identifier, a message and an identifier of the client to which it was
sent. Its purpose is to allow the server to retransmit reply messages when client
processes request them. A problem associated with the use of a history is its memory
cost. A history will become very large unless the server can tell when the messages will
no longer be needed for retransmission.
As clients can make only one request at a time, the server can interpret each
request as an acknowledgement of its previous reply. Therefore the history need contain
only the last reply message sent to each client. However, the volume of reply messages
in a server’s history may still be a problem when it has a large number of clients. This
is compounded by the fact that, when a client process terminates, it does not
acknowledge the last reply it has received – messages in the history are therefore
normally discarded after a limited period of time.
Styles ofexchange protocols • Three protocols, that produce differing behaviours in the
presence of communication failures are used for implementing various types of request
behaviour. They were originally identified by Spector [1982]:
(cid:129) the request (R) protocol;
(cid:129) the request-reply (RR) protocol;
(cid:129) the request-reply-acknowledgereply (RRA) protocol.
The messages passed in these protocols are summarized in Figure 5.5. In the R protocol,
a single Request message is sent by the client to the server. The R protocol may be used
when there is no value to be returned from the remote operation and the client requires
no confirmation that the operation has been executed. The client may proceed
immediately after the request message is sent as there is no need to wait for a reply
message. This protocol is implemented over UDP datagrams and therefore suffers from
the same communication failures.
The RR protocol is useful for most client-server exchanges because it is based on
the request-reply protocol. Special acknowledgement messages are not required,
because a server’s reply message is regarded as an acknowledgement of the client’s
request message. Similarly, a subsequent call from a client may be regarded as an
acknowledgement of a server’s reply message. As we have seen, communication


===== page 209 =====
SECTION 5.2 REQUEST-REPLY PROTOCOLS 191
Figure 5.5 RPC exchange protocols
Name Messages sent by
Client Server Client
R Request
RR Request Reply
RRA Request Reply Acknowledge reply
failures due to UDP datagrams being lost may be masked by the retransmission of
requests with duplicate filtering and the saving of replies in a history for retransmission.
The RRA protocol is based on the exchange of three messages: request-reply-
acknowledge reply. The Acknowledge reply message contains the requestId from the
reply message being acknowledged. This will enable the server to discard entries from
its history. The arrival of a requestId in an acknowledgement message will be
interpreted as acknowledging the receipt of all reply messages with lower requestIds, so
the loss of an acknowledgement message is harmless. Although the exchange involves
an additional message, it need not block the client, as the acknowledgement may be
transmitted after the reply has been given to the client. However it does use processing
and network resources. Exercise 5.10 suggests an optimization to the RRA protocol.
Use of TCP streams to implement the request-reply protocol • Section 4.2.3 mentioned
that it is often difficult to decide on an appropriate size for the buffer in which to receive
datagrams. In the request-reply protocol, this applies to the buffers used by the server to
receive request messages and by the client to receive replies. The limited length of
datagrams (usually 8kilobytes) may not be regarded as adequate for use in transparent
RMIor RPC systems, since the arguments or results of procedures may be of any size.
The desire to avoid implementing multipacket protocols is one of the reasons for
choosing to implement request-reply protocols over TCP streams, allowing arguments
and results of any size to be transmitted. In particular, Java object serialization is a
stream protocol that allows arguments and results to be sent over streams between the
client and server, making it possible for collections of objects of any size to be
transmitted reliably. If the TCP protocol is used, it ensures that request and reply
messages are delivered reliably, so there is no need for the request-reply protocol to deal
with retransmission of messages and filtering of duplicates or with histories. In addition
the flow-control mechanism allows large arguments and results to be passed without
taking special measures to avoid overwhelming the recipient. Thus the TCP protocol is
chosen for request-reply protocols because it can simplify their implementation. If
successive requests and replies between the same client-server pair are sent over the
same stream, the connection overhead need not apply to every remote invocation. Also,
the overhead due to TCP acknowledgement messages is reduced when a reply message
follows soon after a request message.
Howeever, if the application does not require all of the facilities offered by TCP,
a more efficient, specially tailored protocol can be implemented over UDP. For
example, Sun NFS does not require support for messages of unlimited size, since it


===== page 210 =====
192 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
transmits fixed-size file blocks between client and server. In addition to that, its
operations are designed to be idempotent, so it does not matter if operations are executed
more than once in order to retransmit lost reply messages, making it unnecessary to
maintain a history.
HTTP: An example of a request-reply protocol • Chapter 1 introduced the HyperText
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) used by web browser clients to make requests to web servers
and to receive replies from them. To recap, web servers manage resources implemented
in different ways:
(cid:129) as data – for example the text of an HTML page, an image or the class of an applet;
(cid:129) as a program – for example, servlets [java.sun.com III], or PHP or Python
programs that run on the web server.
Client requests specify a URL that includes the DNS hostname of a web server and an
optional port number on the web server as well as the identifier of a resource on that
server.
HTTP is a protocol that specifies the messages involved in a request-reply
exchange, the methods, arguments and results, and the rules for representing
(marshalling) them in the messages. It supports a fixed set of methods (GET, PUT,
POST, etc) that are applicable to all of the server’s resources. It is unlike the previously
described protocols, where each service has its own set of operations. In addition to
invoking methods on web resources, the protocol allows for content negotiation and
password-style authentication:
Content negotiation: Clients’ requests can include information as to what data
representations they can accept (for example, language or media type), enabling the
server to choose the representation that is the most appropriate for the user.
Authentication: Credentials and challenges are used to support password-style
authentication. On the first attempt to access a password-protected area, the server
reply contains a challenge applicable to the resource. Chapter 11 explains challenges.
When a client receives a challenge, it gets the user to type a name and password and
submits the associated credentials with subsequent requests.
HTTP is implemented over TCP. In the original version of the protocol, each client-
server interaction consisted of the following steps:
(cid:129) The client requests and the server accepts a connection at the default server port
or at a port specified in the URL.
(cid:129) The client sends a request message to the server.
(cid:129) The server sends a reply message to the client.
(cid:129) The connection is closed.
However, establishing and closing a connection for every request-reply exchange is
expensive, overloading the server and causing too many messages to be sent over the
network. Bearing in mind that browsers generally make multiple requests to the same
server – for example, to get the images in a page just supplied – a later version of the
protocol (HTTP 1.1, see RFC 2616 [Fielding et al. 1999]) uses persistent connections –
connections that remain open over a series of request-reply exchanges between client


===== page 211 =====
SECTION 5.2 REQUEST-REPLY PROTOCOLS 193
Figure 5.6 HTTPRequest message
method URL or pathname HTTP version headers message body
GET http://www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk/index.html HTTP/ 1.1
and server. A persistent connection can be closed by the client or server at any time by
sending an indication to the other participant. Servers will close a persistent connection
when it has been idle for a period of time. It is possible that a client may receive a
message from the server saying that the connection is closed while it is in the middle of
sending another request or requests. In such cases, the browser will resend the requests
without user involvement, provided that the operations involved are idempotent. For
example, the method GET described below is idempotent. Where non-idempotent
operations are involved, the browser should consult the user as to what to do next.
Requests and replies are marshalled into messages as ASCII text strings, but
resources can be represented as byte sequences and may be compressed. The use of text
in the external data representation has simplified the use of HTTP for application
programmers who work directly with the protocol. In this context, a textual
representation does not add much to the length of the messages.
Data resources are supplied as MIME-like structures in arguments and results.
Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME), specified in RFC 2045 [Freed and
Borenstein 1996], is a standard for sending multipart data containing, for example, text,
images and sound in email messages. Data is prefixed with its MIME type so that the
recipient will know how to handle it. A MIME type specifies a type and a subtype, for
example, text/plain, text/html, image/gif or image/jpeg. Clients can also specify the
MIME types that they are willing to accept.
HTTP methods • Each client request specifies the name of a method to be applied to a
resource at the server and the URL of that resource. The reply reports on the status of
the request. Requests and replies may also contain resource data, the contents of a form
or the output of a program resource run on the web server. The methods include the
following:
GET: Requests the resource whose URL is given as its argument. If the URL refers
to data, then the web server replies by returning the data identified by that URL. If
the URL refers to a program, then the web server runs the program and returns its
output to the client. Arguments may be added to the URL; for example, GET can be
used to send the contents of a form to a program as an argument. The GET operation
can be made conditional on the date a resource was last modified. GET can also be
configured to obtain parts of the data.
WithGET, all the information for the request is provided in the URL (see, for
example, the query string in Section 1.6).
HEAD: This request is identical to GET,but it does not return any data. However, it
does return all the information about the data, such as the time of last modification,
its type or its size.


===== page 212 =====
194 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
POST: Specifies the URL of a resource (for example a program) that can deal with
the data supplied in the body of the request. The processing carried out on the data
depends on the function of the program specified in the URL. This method is used
when the action may change data on the server. It is designed to deal with:
(cid:129) providing a block of data to a data-handling process such as a servlet – for
example, submitting a web form to buy something from a web site;
(cid:129) posting a message to a mailing list or updating details of members of the list;
(cid:129) extending a database with an append operation.
PUT: Requests that the data supplied in the request is stored with the given URL as
its identifier, either as a modification of an existing resource or as a new resource.
DELETE: The server deletes the resource identified by the given URL. Servers may
not always allow this operation, in which case the reply indicates failure.
OPTIONS: The server supplies the client with a list of methods it allows to be
applied to the given URL (for example GET, HEAD, PUT) and its special
requirements.
TRACE: The server sends back the request message. Used for diagnostic purposes.
The operations PUT and DELETE are idempotent, but POST is not necessarily so
because it can change the state of a resource. The others are safe operations in that they
do not change anything.
The requests described above may be intercepted by a proxy server (see Section 2.3.1).
The responses to GET and HEAD may be cached by proxy servers.
Message contents • TheRequest message specifies the name of a method, the URL of
a resource, the protocol version, some headers and an optional message body. Figure 5.6
shows the contents of an HTTP Request message whose method is GET. When the URL
specifies a data resource, the GET method does not have a message body.
Requests to proxies need the absolute URL, as shown in Figure 5.6. Requests to
origin servers (the origin server is where the resource resides) specify a pathname and
give the DNS name of the origin server in a Host header field. For example,
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk
In general, the header fields contain request modifiers and client information, such as
conditions on the latest date of modification of the resource or acceptable content types
(for example, HTML text, audio or JPEG images). An authorization field can be used to
provide the client’s credentials in the form of a certificate specifying their rights to
access a resource.
AReply message specifies the protocol version, a status code and ‘reason’, some
headers and an optional message body, as shown in Figure 5.7. The status code and
reason provide a report on the server’s success or otherwise in carrying out the request:
the former is a three-digit integer for interpretation by a program, and the latter is a
textual phrase that can be understood by a person. The header fields are used to pass
additional information about the server or access to the resource. For example, if the
request requires authentication, the status of the response indicates this and a header


===== page 213 =====
SECTION 5.3 REMOTE PROCEDURE CALL 195
Figure 5.7 HTTPReply message
HTTP version status code reason headers message body
HTTP/1.1 200 OK resource data
field contains a challenge. Some status returns have quite complex effects. In particular,
a 303 status response tells the browser to look under a different URL, which is supplied
in a header field in the reply. It is intended for use in a response from a program activated
by a POST request when the program needs to redirect the browser to a selected
resource.
The message body in request or reply messages contains the data associated with
the URL specified in the request. The message body has its own headers specifying
information about the data, such as its length, its MIME type, its character set, its content
encoding and the last date it was modified. The MIME type field specifies the type of
the data, for example image/jpeg or text/plain. The content encoding field specifies the
compression algorithm to be used
5.3 Remote procedure call
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the concept of a remote procedure call (RPC) represents a
major intellectual breakthrough in distributed computing, with the goal of making the
programming of distributed systems look similar, if not identical, to conventional
programming – that is, achieving a high level of distribution transparency. This
unification is achieved in a very simple manner, by extending the abstraction of a
procedure call to distributed environments. In particular, in RPC, procedures on remote
machines can be called as if they are procedures in the local address space. The
underlying RPC system then hides important aspects of distribution, including the
encoding and decoding of parameters and results, the passing of messages and the
preserving of the required semantics for the procedure call. This concept was first
introduced by Birrell and Nelson [1984] and paved the way for many of the
developments in distributed systems programming used today.
5.3.1 Design issues for RPC
Before looking at the implementation of RPC systems, we look at three issues that are
important in understanding this concept:
(cid:129) thestyle of programming promoted by RPC – programming with interfaces;
(cid:129) the call semantics associated with RPC;
(cid:129) thekey issue of transparency and how it relates to remote procedure calls.
Programming with interfaces • Most modern programming languages provide a means
of organizing a program as a set of modules that can communicate with one another.
Communication between modules can be by means of procedure calls between modules


===== page 214 =====
196 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
or by direct access to the variables in another module. In order to control the possible
interactions between modules, an explicit interface is defined for each module. The
interface of a module specifies the procedures and the variables that can be accessed
from other modules. Modules are implemented so as to hide all the information about
them except that which is available through its interface. So long as its interface remains
the same, the implementation may be changed without affecting the users of the module.
Interfaces in distributed systems: In a distributed program, the modules can run in
separate processes. In the client-server model, in particular, each server provides a set
of procedures that are available for use by clients. For example, a file server would
provide procedures for reading and writing files. The term service interface is used to
refer to the specification of the procedures offered by a server, defining the types of the
arguments of each of the procedures.
There are a number of benefits to programming with interfaces in distributed
systems, stemming from the important separation between interface and
implementation:
(cid:129) As with any form of modular programming, programmers are concerned only
with the abstraction offered by the service interface and need not be aware of
implementation details.
(cid:129) Extrapolating to (potentially heterogeneous) distributed systems, programmers
also do not need to know the programming language or underlying platform used
to implement the service (an important step towards managing heterogeneity in
distributed systems).
(cid:129) This approach provides natural support for software evolution in that
implementations can change as long as long as the interface (the external view)
remains the same. More correctly, the interface can also change as long as it
remains compatible with the original.
The definition of service interfaces is influenced by the distributed nature of the
underlying infrastructure:
(cid:129) It is not possible for a client module running in one process to access the variables
in a module in another process. Therefore the service interface cannot specify
direct access to variables. Note that CORBA IDL interfaces can specify attributes,
which seems to break this rule. However, the attributes are not accessed directly
but by means of some getter and setter procedures added automatically to the
interface.
(cid:129) The parameter-passing mechanisms used in local procedure calls – for example,
call by value and call by reference, are not suitable when the caller and procedure
are in different processes. In particular, call by reference is not supported. Rather,
the specification of a procedure in the interface of a module in a distributed
program describes the parameters as input or output, or sometimes both. Input
parameters are passed to the remote server by sending the values of the arguments
in the request message and then supplying them as arguments to the operation to
be executed in the server. Output parameters are returned in the reply message and
are used as the result of the call or to replace the values of the corresponding


===== page 215 =====
SECTION 5.3 REMOTE PROCEDURE CALL 197
Figure 5.8 CORBA IDL example
// In file Person.idl
struct Person {
string name;
string place;
long year;
};
interface PersonList {
readonly attribute string listname;
void addPerson(in Person p) ;
void getPerson(in string name, out Person p);
long number();
};
variables in the calling environment. When a parameter is used for both input and
output, the value must be transmitted in both the request and reply messages.
(cid:129) Another difference between local and remote modules is that addresses in one
process are not valid in another remote one. Therefore, addresses cannot be passed
as arguments or returned as results of calls to remote modules.
These constraints have a significant impact on the specification of interface definition
languages, as discussed below.
Interface definition languages: An RPC mechanism can be integrated with a particular
programming language if it includes an adequate notation for defining interfaces,
allowing input and output parameters to be mapped onto the language’s normal use of
parameters. This approach is useful when all the parts of a distributed application can be
written in the same language. It is also convenient because it allows the programmer to
use a single language, for example, Java, for local and remote invocation.
However, many existing useful services are written in C++ and other languages.
It would be beneficial to allow programs written in a variety of languages, including
Java, to access them remotely. Interface definition languages (IDLs) are designed to
allow procedures implemented in different languages to invoke one another. An IDL
provides a notation for defining interfaces in which each of the parameters of an
operation may be described as for input or output in addition to having its type specified.
Figure 5.8 shows a simple example of CORBA IDL. The Person structure is the
same as the one used to illustrate marshalling in Section 4.3.1. The interface named
PersonList specifies the methods available for RMI in a remote object that implements
that interface. For example, the method addPerson specifies its argument as in, meaning
that it is an input argument, and the method getPerson that retrieves an instance of
Person by name specifies its second argument as out, meaning that it is an output
argument.


===== page 216 =====
198 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.9 Call semantics
Fault tolerance measures Call semantics
Retransmit request Duplicate (cid:3) Re-execute procedure (cid:3)
message filtering or retransmit reply
No Not applicable Not applicable Maybe
Yes No Re-execute procedure At-least-once
Yes Yes Retransmit reply At-most-once
The concept of an IDL was initially developed for RPC systems but applies
equally to RMI and also web services. Our case studies include:
(cid:129) SunXDR as an example of an IDL for RPC (in Section 5.3.3);
(cid:129) CORBA IDL as an example of an IDL for RMI (in Chapter 8 and also included
above);
(cid:129) the Web Services Description Language (WSDL), which is designed for an
Internet-wide RPC supporting web services (see Section 9.3);
(cid:129) and protocol buffers used at Google for storing and interchanging many kinds of
structured information (see Section 21.4.1).
RPC call semantics • Request-reply protocols were discussed in Section 5.2, where we
showed that doOperation can be implemented in different ways to provide different
delivery guarantees. The main choices are:
Retry request message: Controls whether to retransmit the request message until
either a reply is received or the server is assumed to have failed.
Duplicate filtering:Controlswhen retransmissions are used and whether to filter out
duplicate requests at the server.
Retransmission of results:Controlswhether to keep a history of result messages to
enable lost results to be retransmitted without re-executing the operations at the
server.
Combinations of these choices lead to a variety of possible semantics for the reliability
ofremote invocations as seen by the invoker. Figure 5.9 shows the choices of interest,
with corresponding names for the semantics that they produce. Note that for local
procedure calls, the semantics are exactly once, meaning that every procedure is
executed exactly once (except in the case of process failure). The choices of RPC
invocation semantics are defined as follows.


===== page 217 =====
SECTION 5.3 REMOTE PROCEDURE CALL 199
Maybe semantics: With maybe semantics, the remote procedure call may be executed
once or not at all. Maybe semantics arises when no fault-tolerance measures are applied
and can suffer from the following types of failure:
(cid:129) omission failures if the request or result message is lost;
(cid:129) crash failures when the server containing the remote operation fails.
If the result message has not been received after a timeout and there are no retries, it is
uncertain whether the procedure has been executed. If the request message was lost, then
the procedure will not have been executed. On the other hand, the procedure may have
been executed and the result message lost. A crash failure may occur either before or
after the procedure is executed. Moreover, in an asynchronous system, the result of
executing the procedure may arrive after the timeout. Maybe semantics is useful only for
applications in which occasional failed calls are acceptable.
At-least-oncesemantics: With at-least-once semantics, the invoker receives either a
result, in which case the invoker knows that the procedure was executed at least once,
or an exception informing it that no result was received. At-least-once semantics can be
achieved by the retransmission of request messages, which masks the omission failures
of the request or result message. At-least-once semantics can suffer from the following
types of failure:
(cid:129) crash failures when the server containing the remote procedure fails;
(cid:129) arbitrary failures – in cases when the request message is retransmitted, the remote
server may receive it and execute the procedure more than once, possibly causing
wrong values to be stored or returned.
Section 5.2 defines an idempotent operation as one that can be performed repeatedly
with the same effect as if it had been performed exactly once. Non-idempotent
operations can have the wrong effect if they are performed more than once. For example,
an operation to increase a bank balance by $10 should be performed only once; if it were
to be repeated, the balance would grow and grow! If the operations in a server can be
designed so that all of the procedures in their service interfaces are idempotent
operations, then at-least-once call semantics may be acceptable.
At-most-once semantics: With at-most-once semantics, the caller receives either a
result, in which case the caller knows that the procedure was executed exactly once, or
an exception informing it that no result was received, in which case the procedure will
have been executed either once or not at all. At-most-once semantics can be achieved by
using all of the fault-tolerance measures outlined in Figure 5.9. As in the previous case,
the use of retries masks any omission failures of the request or result messages. This set
of fault tolerance measures prevents arbitrary failures by ensuring that for each RPC a
procedure is never executed more than once. Sun RPC (discussed in Section 5.3.3)
provides at-least-once call semantics.
Transparency • The originators of RPC, Birrell and Nelson [1984], aimed to make
remote procedure calls as much like local procedure calls as possible, with no distinction
in syntax between a local and a remote procedure call. All the necessary calls to
marshalling and message-passing procedures were hidden from the programmer making
the call. Although request messages are retransmitted after a timeout, this is transparent
to the caller to make the semantics of remote procedure calls like that of local procedure
calls.


===== page 218 =====
200 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
More precisely, returning to the terminology of Chapter 1, RPC strives to offer at
least location and access transparency, hiding the physical location of the (potentially
remote) procedure and also accessing local and remote procedures in the same way.
Middleware can also offer additional levels of transparency to RPC.
However, remote procedure calls are more vulnerable to failure than local ones,
since they involve a network, another computer and another process. Whichever of the
above semantics is chosen, there is always the chance that no result will be received, and
in the case of failure, it is impossible to distinguish between failure of the network and
of the remote server process. This requires that clients making remote calls are able to
recover from such situations.
The latency of a remote procedure call is several orders of magnitude greater than
that of a local one. This suggests that programs that make use of remote calls need to be
able to take this factor into account, perhaps by minimizing remote interactions. The
designers of Argus [Liskov and Scheifler 1982] suggested that a caller should be able to
abort a remote procedure call that is taking too long in such a way that it has no effect
on the server. To allow this, the server would need to be able to restore things to how
they were before the procedure was called. These issues are discussed in Chapter 16.
Remote procedure calls also require a different style of parameter passing, as
discussed above. In particular, RPC does not offer call by reference.
Waldo et al. [1994] say that the difference between local and remote operations
should be expressed at the service interface, to allow participants to react in a consistent
way to possible partial failures. Other systems went further than this by arguing that the
syntax of a remote call should be different from that of a local call: in the case of Argus,
the language was extended to make remote operations explicit to the programmer.
The choice as to whether RPC should be transparent is also available to the
designers of IDLs. For example, in some IDLs, a remote invocation may throw an
exception when the client is unable to communicate with a remote procedure. This
requires that the client program handle such exceptions, allowing it to deal with such
failures. An IDL can also provide a facility for specifying the call semantics of a
procedure. This can help the designer of the service – for example, if at-least-once call
semantics is chosen to avoid the overheads of at-most-once, the operations must be
designed to be idempotent.
The current consensus is that remote calls should be made transparent in the sense
that the syntax of a remote call is the same as that of a local invocation, but that the
difference between local and remote calls should be expressed in their interfaces.
5.3.2 Implementation of RPC
The software components required to implement RPC are shown in Figure 5.10. The
client that accesses a service includes one stub procedure for each procedure in the
service interface. The stub procedure behaves like a local procedure to the client, but
instead of executing the call, it marshals the procedure identifier and the arguments into
a request message, which it sends via its communication module to the server. When the
reply message arrives, it unmarshals the results. The server process contains a dispatcher
together with one server stub procedure and one service procedure for each procedure
in the service interface. The dispatcher selects one of the server stub procedures
according to the procedure identifier in the request message. The server stub procedure


===== page 219 =====
SECTION 5.3 REMOTE PROCEDURE CALL 201
Figure 5.10 Role of client and server stub procedures in RPC
client process server process
Request
Reply
client stub server stub
procedure procedure
client service
program Communication Communication procedure
module module dispatcher
then unmarshals the arguments in the request message, calls the corresponding service
procedure and marshals the return values for the reply message. The service procedures
implement the procedures in the service interface. The client and server stub procedures
and the dispatcher can be generated automatically by an interface compiler from the
interface definition of the service.
RPC is generally implemented over a request-reply protocol like the ones
discussed in Section 5.2. The contents of request and reply messages are the same as
those illustrated for request-reply protocols in Figure 5.4. RPC may be implemented to
have one of the choices of invocation semantics discussed in Section 5.3.1 – at-least-
once or at-most-once is generally chosen. To achieve this, the communication module
will implement the desired design choices in terms of retransmission of requests, dealing
with duplicates and retransmission of results, as shown in Figure 5.9.
5.3.3 Case study: Sun RPC
RFC 1831 [Srinivasan 1995a] describes Sun RPC, which was designed for client-server
communication in the Sun Network File System (NFS). Sun RPC is sometimes called
ONC (Open Network Computing) RPC. It is supplied as a part of the various Sun and
other UNIX operating systems and is also available with NFS installations.
Implementors have the choice of using remote procedure calls over either UDP or TCP.
When Sun RPC is used with UDP, request and reply messages are restricted in length –
theoretically to 64 kilobytes, but more often in practice to 8 or 9 kilobytes. It uses at-
least-once call semantics. Broadcast RPC is an option.
The Sun RPC system provides an interface language called XDR and an interface
compiler called rpcgen, which is intended for use with the C programming language.
Interfacedefinitionlanguage • The Sun XDR language, which was originally designed
for specifying external data representations, was extended to become an interface
definition language. It may be used to define a service interface for Sun RPC by
specifying a set of procedure definitions together with supporting type definitions. The
notation is rather primitive in comparison with that used by CORBA IDL or Java. In
particular:


===== page 220 =====
202 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.11 Files interface in Sun XDR
const MAX = 1000;
typedef int FileIdentifier;
typedef int FilePointer;
typedef int Length;
struct Data {
int length;
char buffer[MAX];
};
struct writeargs {
FileIdentifier f;
FilePointer position;
Data data;
};
struct readargs {
FileIdentifier f;
FilePointer position;
Length length;
};
program FILEREADWRITE {
version VERSION {
void WRITE(writeargs)=1; 1
Data READ(readargs)=2; 2
}=2;
} = 9999;
(cid:129) Most languages allow interface names to be specified, but Sun RPC does not –
instead of this, a program number and a version number are supplied. The program
numbers can be obtained from a central authority to allow every program to have
its own unique number. The version number is intended to be changed when a
procedure signature changes. Both program and version number are passed in the
request message, so the client and server can check that they are using the same
version.
(cid:129) A procedure definition specifies a procedure signature and a procedure number.
The procedure number is used as a procedure identifier in request messages.
(cid:129) Only a single input parameter is allowed. Therefore, procedures requiring
multiple parameters must include them as components of a single structure.
(cid:129) The output parameters of a procedure are returned via a single result.
(cid:129) The procedure signature consists of the result type, the name of the procedure and
the type of the input parameter. The type of both the result and the input parameter
may specify either a single value or a structure containing several values.


===== page 221 =====
SECTION 5.3 REMOTE PROCEDURE CALL 203
For example, see the XDR definition in Figure 5.11 of an interface with a pair of
procedures for writing and reading files. The program number is 9999 and the version
number is 2. The READ procedure (line 2) takes as its input parameter a structure with
three components specifying a file identifier, a position in the file and the number of
bytes required. Its result is a structure containing the number of bytes returned and the
file data. The WRITE procedure (line 1) has no result. The WRITE and READ procedures
are given numbers 1 and 2. The number 0 is reserved for a null procedure, which is
generated automatically and is intended to be used to test whether a server is available.
This interface definition language provides a notation for defining constants,
typedefs, structures, enumerated types, unions and programs. Typedefs, structures and
enumerated types use the C language syntax. The interface compiler rpcgen can be used
to generate the following from an interface definition:
(cid:129) client stub procedures;
(cid:129) server main procedure, dispatcher and server stub procedures;
(cid:129) XDR marshalling and unmarshalling procedures for use by the dispatcher and
client and server stub procedures.
Binding • Sun RPC runs a local binding service called the port mapper at a well-known
port number on each computer. Each instance of a port mapper records the program
number, version number and port number in use by each service running locally. When
a server starts up it registers its program number, version number and port number with
the local port mapper. When a client starts up, it finds out the server’s port by making a
remote request to the port mapper at the server’s host, specifying the program number
and version number.
When a service has multiple instances running on different computers, the
instances may use different port numbers for receiving client requests. If a client needs
to multicast a request to all the instances of a service that are using different port
numbers, it cannot use a direct IP multicast message for this purpose. The solution is that
clients make multicast remote procedure calls by multicasting them to all the port
mappers, specifying the program and version number. Each port mapper forwards all
such calls to the appropriate local service program, if there is one.
Authentication. Sun RPC request and reply messages provide additional fields enabling
authentication information to be passed between client and server. The request message
contains the credentials of the user running the client program. For example, in the
UNIX style of authentication the credentials include the uid and gid of the user. Access
control mechanisms can be built on top of the authentication information which is made
available to the server procedures via a second argument. The server program is
responsible for enforcing access control by deciding whether to execute each procedure
call according to the authentication information. For example, if the server is an NFS file
server, it can check whether the user has sufficient rights to carry out a requested file
operation. Several different authentication protocols can be supported. These include:
(cid:129) none;
(cid:129) UNIX style, as described above;
(cid:129) a style in which a shared key is established for signing the RPC messages;
(cid:129) Kerberos (see Chapter 11).
A field in the RPC header indicates which style is being used.


===== page 222 =====
204 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
A more generic approach to security is described in RFC 2203 [Eisler et al. 1997].
It provides for the secrecy and integrity of RPC messages as well as authentication. It
allows the client and server to negotiate a security context in which either no security is
applied, or in the case that security is required, message integrity or message privacy or
both may be applied.
Client and server programs • Further material on Sun RPC is available at
www.cdk5.net/rmi. It includes example client and server programs corresponding to the
interface defined in Figure 5.11.
5.4 Remote method invocation
Remote method invocation (RMI) is closely related to RPC but extended into the world
of distributed objects. In RMI, a calling object can invoke a method in a potentially
remote object. As with RPC, the underlying details are generally hidden from the user.
The commonalities between RMI and RPC are as follows:
(cid:129) They both support programming with interfaces, with the resultant benefits that
stem from this approach (see Section 5.3.1).
(cid:129) They are both typically constructed on top of request-reply protocols and can offer
a range of call semantics such as at-least-once and at-most-once.
(cid:129) They both offer a similar level of transparency – that is, local and remote calls
employ the same syntax but remote interfaces typically expose the distributed
nature of the underlying call, for example by supporting remote exceptions.
The following differences lead to added expressiveness when it comes to the
programming of complex distributed applications and services.
(cid:129) The programmer is able to use the full expressive power of object-oriented
programming in the development of distributed systems software, including the
use of objects, classes and inheritance, and can also employ related object-
oriented design methodologies and associated tools.
(cid:129) Building on the concept of object identity in object-oriented systems, all objects
in an RMI-based system have unique object references (whether they are local or
remote), such object references can also be passed as parameters, thus offering
significantly richer parameter-passing semantics than in RPC.
The issue of parameter passing is particularly important in distributed systems. RMI
allows the programmer to pass parameters not only by value, as input or output
parameters, but also by object reference. Passing references is particularly attractive if
the underlying parameter is large or complex. The remote end, on receiving an object
reference, can then access this object using remote method invocation, instead of having
to transmit the object value across the network.
The rest of this section examines the concept of remote method invocation in more
detail, looking initially at the key issues surrounding distributed object models before
looking at implementation issues surrounding RMI, including distributed garbage
collection.


===== page 223 =====
SECTION 5.4 REMOTE METHOD INVOCATION 205
5.4.1 Design issues for RMI
As mentioned above, RMI shares the same design issues as RPC in terms of
programming with interfaces, call semantics and level of transparency. The reader is
encouraged to refer back to Section 5.3.1 for discussion of these items.
The key added design issue relates to the object model and, in particular,
achieving the transition from objects to distributed objects. We first describe the
conventional, single-image object model and then describe the distributed object model.
The object model • An object-oriented program, for example in Java or C++, consists
of a collection of interacting objects, each of which consists of a set of data and a set of
methods. An object communicates with other objects by invoking their methods,
generally passing arguments and receiving results. Objects can encapsulate their data
and the code of their methods. Some languages, for example Java and C++, allow
programmers to define objects whose instance variables can be accessed directly. But
for use in a distributed object system, an object’s data should be accessible only via its
methods.
Object references: Objects can be accessed via object references. For example, in Java, a
variable that appears to hold an object actually holds a reference to that object. To
invoke a method in an object, the object reference and method name are given, together
with any necessary arguments. The object whose method is invoked is sometimes called
thetarget and sometimes the receiver. Object references are first-class values, meaning
that they may, for example, be assigned to variables, passed as arguments and returned
as results of methods.
Interfaces: An interface provides a definition of the signatures of a set of methods (that
is, the types of their arguments, return values and exceptions) without specifying their
implementation. An object will provide a particular interface if its class contains code
that implements the methods of that interface. In Java, a class may implement several
interfaces, and the methods of an interface may be implemented by any class. An
interface also defines types that can be used to declare the type of variables or of the
parameters and return values of methods. Note that interfaces do not have constructors.
Actions : Action in an object-oriented program is initiated by an object invoking a
method in another object. An invocation can include additional information (arguments)
needed to carry out the method. The receiver executes the appropriate method and then
returns control to the invoking object, sometimes supplying a result. An invocation of a
method can have three effects:
1. The state of the receiver may be changed.
2. A new object may be instantiated, for example, by using a constructor in Java or
C++.
3. Further invocations on methods in other objects may take place.
As an invocation can lead to further invocations of methods in other objects, an action
is a chain of related method invocations, each of which eventually returns.
Exceptions: Programs can encounter many sorts of errors and unexpected conditions of
varying seriousness. During the execution of a method, many different problems may be
discovered: for example, inconsistent values in the object’s variables, or failures in


===== page 224 =====
206 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
attempts to read or write to files or network sockets. When programmers need to insert
tests in their code to deal with all possible unusual or erroneous cases, this detracts from
the clarity of the normal case. Exceptions provide a clean way to deal with error
conditions without complicating the code. In addition, each method heading explicitly
lists as exceptions the error conditions it might encounter, allowing users of the method
to deal with them. A block of code may be defined to throw an exception whenever
particular unexpected conditions or errors arise. This means that control passes to
another block of code that catches the exception. Control does not return to the place
where the exception was thrown.
Garbage collection: It is necessary to provide a means of freeing the space occupied by
objects when they are no longer needed. A language such as Java, that can detect
automatically when an object is no longer accessible recovers the space and makes it
available for allocation to other objects. This process is called garbage collection. When
a language (for example, C++) does not support garbage collection, the programmer has
to cope with the freeing of space allocated to objects. This can be a major source of
errors.
Distributed objects • The state of an object consists of the values of its instance
variables. In the object-based paradigm the state of a program is partitioned into separate
parts, each of which is associated with an object. Since object-based programs are
logically partitioned, the physical distribution of objects into different processes or
computers in a distributed system is a natural extension (the issue of placement is
discussed in Section 2.3.1).
Distributed object systems may adopt the client-server architecture. In this case,
objects are managed by servers and their clients invoke their methods using remote
method invocation. In RMI, the client’s request to invoke a method of an object is sent
in a message to the server managing the object. The invocation is carried out by
executing a method of the object at the server and the result is returned to the client in
another message. To allow for chains of related invocations, objects in servers are
allowed to become clients of objects in other servers.
Distributed objects can assume other architectural models. For example, objects
can be replicated in order to obtain the usual benefits of fault tolerance and enhanced
performance, and objects can be migrated with a view to enhancing their performance
and availability.
Having client and server objects in different processes enforces encapsulation.
That is, the state of an object can be accessed only by the methods of the object, which
means that it is not possible for unauthorized methods to act on the state. For example,
the possibility of concurrent RMIs from objects in different computers implies that an
object may be accessed concurrently. Therefore the possibility of conflicting accesses
arises. However, the fact that the data of an object is accessed only by its own methods
allows objects to provide methods for protecting themselves against incorrect accesses.
For example, they may use synchronization primitives such as condition variables to
protect access to their instance variables.
Another advantage of treating the shared state of a distributed program as a
collection of objects is that an object may be accessed via RMI, or it may be copied into
a local cache and accessed directly, provided that the class implementation is available
locally.


===== page 225 =====
SECTION 5.4 REMOTE METHOD INVOCATION 207
Figure 5.12 Remote and local method invocations
in
re
v
m
oc
o
a
t
t
e
ion
l
i
o
n
c
v
a
o
l cation C
local
E
remote
A B local invocation invocation F
invocation
D
The fact that objects are accessed only via their methods gives rise to another
advantage of heterogeneous systems, that different data formats may be used at different
sites – these formats will be unnoticed by clients that use RMI to access the methods of
the objects.
The distributed object model • This section discusses extensions to the object model to
make it applicable to distributed objects. Each process contains a collection of objects,
some of which can receive both local and remote invocations, whereas the other objects
can receive only local invocations, as shown in Figure 5.12. Method invocations
between objects in different processes, whether in the same computer or not, are known
as remote method invocations. Method invocations between objects in the same process
are local method invocations.
We refer to objects that can receive remote invocations as remote objects. In
Figure 5.12, the objects B and F are remote objects. All objects can receive local
invocations, although they can receive them only from other objects that hold references
to them. For example, object C must have a reference to object E so that it can invoke
one of its methods. The following two fundamental concepts are at the heart of the
distributed object model:
Remote object references: Other objects can invoke the methods of a remote object
if they have access to its remote object reference. For example, a remote object
reference for B in Figure 5.12 must be available to A.
Remote interfaces: Every remote object has a remote interface that specifies which
of its methods can be invoked remotely. For example, the objects B and F in Figure
5.12 must have remote interfaces.
We look at remote object references, remote interfaces and other aspects of the
distributed object model next.
Remote object references: The notion of object reference is extended to allow any object
that can receive an RMI to have a remote object reference. A remote object reference is
an identifier that can be used throughout a distributed system to refer to a particular
unique remote object. Its representation, which is generally different from that of a local
object reference is discussed in Section 4.3.4. Remote object references are analogous
to local ones in that:
1. The remote object to receive a remote method invocation is specified by the
invoker as a remote object reference.
2. Remote object references may be passed as arguments and results of remote
method invocations.


===== page 226 =====
208 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.13 A remote object and its remote interface
remoteobject
Data
remote
interface{
m1 implementation m4
m5
m2
m3 of methods m6
Remote interfaces: The class of a remote object implements the methods of its remote
interface, for example as public instance methods in Java. Objects in other processes can
invoke only the methods that belong to its remote interface, as shown in Figure 5.13.
Local objects can invoke the methods in the remote interface as well as other methods
implemented by a remote object. Note that remote interfaces, like all interfaces, do not
have constructors.
The CORBA system provides an interface definition language (IDL), which is
used for defining remote interfaces. See Figure 5.8 for an example of a remote interface
defined in CORBA IDL. The classes of remote objects and the client programs may be
implemented in any language for which an IDL compiler is available, such as C++, Java
or Python. CORBA clients need not use the same language as the remote object in order
to invoke its methods remotely.
In Java RMI, remote interfaces are defined in the same way as any other Java
interface. They acquire their ability to be remote interfaces by extending an interface
named Remote. Both CORBA IDL (Chapter 8) and Java support multiple inheritance of
interfaces. That is, an interface is allowed to extend one or more other interfaces.
Actions in a distributed object system • As in the non-distributed case, an action is
initiated by a method invocation, which may result in further invocations on methods in
other objects. But in the distributed case, the objects involved in a chain of related
invocations may be located in different processes or different computers. When an
invocation crosses the boundary of a process or computer, RMI is used, and the remote
reference of the object must be available to the invoker. In Figure 5.12, object A needs
to hold a remote object reference to object B.Remote object references may be obtained
as the results of remote method invocations. For example, object A in Figure 5.12 might
obtain a remote reference to object F from object B.
When an action leads to the instantiation of a new object, that object will normally
live within the process where instantiation is requested – for example, where the
constructor was used. If the newly instantiated object has a remote interface, it will be a
remote object with a remote object reference.
Distributed applications may provide remote objects with methods for
instantiating objects that can be accessed by RMI, thus effectively providing the effect
of remote instantiation of objects. For example, if the object L in Figure 5.14 contains a
method for creating remote objects, then the remote invocations from C and K could
lead to the instantiation of the objects M and N, respectively.


===== page 227 =====
SECTION 5.4 REMOTE METHOD INVOCATION 209
Figure 5.14 Instantiation of remote objects
L
C K
remote instantiate instantiate remote
invocation invocation
M N
Garbage collection in a distributed-object system: If a language, for example Java,
supports garbage collection, then any associated RMI system should allow garbage
collection of remote objects. Distributed garbage collection is generally achieved by
cooperation between the existing local garbage collector and an added module that
carries out a form of distributed garbage collection, usually based on reference counting.
Section 5.4.3 describes such a scheme in detail. If garbage collection is not available,
then remote objects that are no longer required should be deleted.
Exceptions: Any remote invocation may fail for reasons related to the invoked object
being in a different process or computer from the invoker. For example, the process
containing the remote object may have crashed or may be too busy to reply, or the
invocation or result message may be lost. Therefore, remote method invocation should
be able to raise exceptions such as timeouts that are due to distribution as well as those
raised during the execution of the method invoked. Examples of the latter are an attempt
to read beyond the end of a file, or to access a file without the correct permissions.
CORBA IDL provides a notation for specifying application-level exceptions, and
the underlying system generates standard exceptions when errors due to distribution
occur. CORBA client programs need to be able to handle exceptions. For example, a
C++ client program will use the exception mechanisms in C++.
5.4.2 Implementation of RMI
Several separate objects and modules are involved in achieving a remote method
invocation. These are shown in Figure 5.15, in which an application-level object A
invokes a method in a remote application-level object B for which it holds a remote
object reference. This section discusses the roles of each of the components shown in
that figure, dealing first with the communication and remote reference modules and then
with the RMI software that runs over them.
We then explore the following related topics: the generation of proxies, the
binding of names to their remote object references, the activation and passivation of
objects and the location of objects from their remote object references.
Communication module • The two cooperating communication modules carry out the
request-reply protocol, which transmits request and reply messages between the client
and server. The contents of request and reply messages are shown in Figure 5.4. The
communication module uses only the first threeitems, which specify the message type,
itsrequestId and the remote reference of the object to be invoked. The operationId and


===== page 228 =====
210 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.15 The role of proxy and skeleton in remote method invocation
server
client
remote
object A proxy for B skeleton object B
Request & dispatcher
for B’s class
Reply
servant
Remote Communication Communication Remote reference
module
reference module module module
all the marshalling and unmarshalling are the concern of the RMI software, discussed
below. The communication modules are together responsible for providing a specified
invocation semantics, for example at-most-once.
The communication module in the server selects the dispatcher for the class of the
object to be invoked, passing on its local reference, which it gets from the remote
reference module in return for the remote object identifier in the request message. The
role of dispatcher is discussed in the forthcoming section on RMI software.
Remote reference module • A remote reference module is responsible for translating
between local and remote object references and for creating remote object references.
To support its responsibilities, the remote reference module in each process has a remote
object table that records the correspondence between local object references in that
process and remote object references (which are system-wide). The table includes:
(cid:129) An entry for all the remote objects held by the process. For example, in Figure
5.15 the remote object B will be recorded in the table at the server.
(cid:129) An entry for each local proxy. For example, in Figure 5.15 the proxy for B will be
recorded in the table at the client.
The role of a proxy is discussed in the subsection on RMI software. The actions of the
remote reference module are as follows:
(cid:129) When a remote object is to be passed as an argument or a result for the first time,
the remote reference module is asked to create a remote object reference, which it
adds to its table.
(cid:129) When a remote object reference arrives in a request or reply message, the remote
reference module is asked for the corresponding local object reference, which may
refer either to a proxy or to a remote object. In the case that the remote object
reference is not in the table, the RMI software creates a new proxy and asks the
remote reference module to add it to the table.
This module is called by components of the RMI software when they are marshalling
and unmarshalling remote object references. For example, when a request message
arrives, the table is used to find out which local object is to be invoked.


===== page 229 =====
SECTION 5.4 REMOTE METHOD INVOCATION 211
Servants • Aservant is an instance of a class that provides the body of a remote object.
It is the servant that eventually handles the remote requests passed on by the
corresponding skeleton. Servants live within a server process. They are created when
remote objects are instantiated and remain in use until they are no longer needed, finally
being garbage collected or deleted.
The RMI software • This consists of a layer of software between the application-level
objects and the communication and remote reference modules. The roles of the
middleware objects shown in Figure 5.15 are as follows:
Proxy: The role of a proxy is to make remote method invocation transparent to
clients by behaving like a local object to the invoker; but instead of executing an
invocation, it forwards it in a message to a remote object. It hides the details of the
remote object reference, the marshalling of arguments, unmarshalling of results and
sending and receiving of messages from the client. There is one proxy for each
remote object for which a process holds a remote object reference. The class of a
proxy implements the methods in the remote interface of the remote object it
represents, which ensures that remote method invocations are suitable for the type of
the remote object. However, the proxy implements them quite differently. Each
method of the proxy marshals a reference to the target object, its own operationId and
its arguments into a request message and sends it to the target. It then awaits the reply
message, unmarshals it and returns the results to the invoker.
Dispatcher: A server has one dispatcher and one skeleton for each class
representing a remote object. In our example, the server has a dispatcher and a
skeleton for the class of remote object B. The dispatcher receives request messages
from the communication module. It uses the operationId to select the appropriate
method in the skeleton, passing on the request message. The dispatcher and the proxy
use the same allocation of operationIds to the methods of the remote interface.
Skeleton: The class of a remote object has a skeleton, which implements the methods
in the remote interface. They are implemented quite differently from the methods in
the servant that incarnates a remote object. A skeleton method unmarshals the
arguments in the request message and invokes the corresponding method in the
servant. It waits for the invocation to complete and then marshals the result, together
with any exceptions, in a reply message to the sending proxy’s method.
Remote object references are marshalled in the form shown in Figure 4.13, which
includes information about the remote interface of the remote object – for example, the
name of the remote interface or the class of the remote object. This information enables
the proxy class to be determined so that a new proxy may be created when it is needed.
For example, the proxy class name may be generated by appending _proxy to the name
of the remote interface.
Generation of the classes for proxies, dispatchers and skeletons • The classes for the
proxy, dispatcher and skeleton used in RMI are generated automatically by an interface
compiler. For example, in the Orbix implementation of CORBA, interfaces of remote
objects are defined in CORBA IDL, and the interface compiler can be used to generate
the classes for proxies, dispatchers and skeletons in C++ or in Java [www.iona.com].
For Java RMI, the set of methods offered by a remote object is defined as a Java interface


===== page 230 =====
212 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
that is implemented within the class of the remote object. The Java RMI compiler
generates the proxy, dispatcher and skeleton classes from the class of the remote object.
Dynamic invocation: An alternative to proxies • The proxy just described is static, in the
sense that its class is generated from an interface definition and then compiled into the
client code. Sometimes this is not practical, though. Suppose that a client program
receives a remote reference to an object whose remote interface was not available at
compile time. In this case it needs another way to invoke the remote object. Dynamic
invocation gives the client access to a generic representation of a remote invocation like
the doOperation method used in Exercise 5.18, which is available as part of the
infrastructure for RMI (see Section 5.4.1). The client will supply the remote object
reference, the name of the method and the arguments to doOperation and then wait to
receive the results.
Note that although the remote object reference includes information about the
interface of the remote object, such as its name, this is not enough – the names of the
methods and the types of the arguments are required for making a dynamic invocation.
CORBA provides this information via a component called the Interface Repository,
which is described in Chapter 8.
The dynamic invocation interface is not as convenient to use as a proxy, but it is
useful in applications where some of the interfaces of the remote objects cannot be
predicted at design time. An example of such an application is the shared whiteboard
that we use to illustrate Java RMI (Section 5.5), CORBA (Chapter 8) and web services
(Section 9.2.3). To summarize: the shared whiteboard application displays many
different types of shapes, such as circles, rectangles and lines, but it should also be able
to display new shapes that were not predicted when the client was compiled. A client
that uses dynamic invocation is able to address this challenge. We shall see in Section
5.5 that the dynamic downloading of classes to clients is an alternative to dynamic
invocation. This is available in Java RMI – a single-language system.
Dynamic skeletons: It is clear, from the above example, that it can also arise that a server
will need to host remote objects whose interfaces were not known at compile time. For
example, a client may supply a new type of shape to the shared whiteboard server for it
to store. A server with dynamic skeletons would be able to deal with this situation. We
defer describing dynamic skeletons until the chapter on CORBA (Chapter 8). However,
as we shall see in Section 5.5, Java RMI addresses this problem by using a generic
dispatcher and the dynamic downloading of classes to the server.
Serverandclient programs • The server program contains the classes for the
dispatchers and skeletons, together with the implementations of the classes of all of the
servants that it supports. In addition, the server program contains an initialization
section (for example, in a main method in Java or C++). The initialization section is
responsible for creating and initializing at least one of the servants to be hosted by the
server. Additional servants may be created in response to requests from clients. The
initialization section may also register some of its servants with a binder (see below).
Generally it will register just one servant, which can be used to access the rest.
The client program will contain the classes of the proxies for all of the remote
objects that it will invoke. It can use a binder to look up remote object references.


===== page 231 =====
SECTION 5.4 REMOTE METHOD INVOCATION 213
Factory methods: We noted earlier that remote object interfaces cannot include
constructors. This means that servants cannot be created by remote invocation on
constructors. Servants are created either in the initialization section or in methods in a
remote interface designed for that purpose. The term factory method is sometimes used
to refer to a method that creates servants, and a factory object is an object with factory
methods. Any remote object that needs to be able to create new remote objects on
demand for clients must provide methods in its remote interface for this purpose. Such
methods are called factory methods, although they are really just normal methods.
The binder • Client programs generally require a means of obtaining a remote object
reference for at least one of the remote objects held by a server. For example, in Figure
5.12, object A would require a remote object reference for object B. A binder in a
distributed system is a separate service that maintains a table containing mappings from
textual names to remote object references. It is used by servers to register their remote
objects by name and by clients to look them up. Chapter 8 contains a discussion of the
CORBA Naming Service. The Java binder, RMIregistry, is discussed briefly in the case
study on Java RMI in Section 5.5.
Server threads • Whenever an object executes a remote invocation, that execution may
lead to further invocations of methods in other remote objects, which may take some
time to return. To avoid the execution of one remote invocation delaying the execution
of another, servers generally allocate a separate thread for the execution of each remote
invocation. When this is the case, the designer of the implementation of a remote object
must allow for the effects on its state of concurrent executions.
Activation of remote objects • Some applications require that information survive for
long periods of time. However, it is not practical for the objects representing such
information to be kept in running processes for unlimited periods, particularly since they
are not necessarily in use all of the time. To avoid the potential waste of resources that
would result from to running all of the servers that manage remote objects all of the time,
the servers can be started whenever they are needed by clients, as is done for the standard
set of TCP services such as FTP, which are started on demand by a service called Inetd.
Processes that start server processes to host remote objects are called activators, for the
following reasons.
A remote object is described as active when it is available for invocation within
a running process, whereas it is called passive if is not currently active but can be made
active. A passive object consists of two parts:
1. the implementation of its methods;
2. its state in the marshalled form.
Activation consists of creating an active object from the corresponding passive object by
creating a new instance of its class and initializing its instance variables from the stored
state. Passive objects can be activated on demand, for example when they need to be
invoked by other objects.
Anactivator is responsible for:
(cid:129) registering passive objects that are available for activation, which involves
recording the names of servers against the URLs or file names of the
corresponding passive objects;


===== page 232 =====
214 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
(cid:129) starting named server processes and activating remote objects in them;
(cid:129) keeping track of the locations of the servers for remote objects that it has already
activated.
Java RMI provides the ability to make some remote objects activatable [java.sun.com
IX]. When an activatable object is invoked, if that object is not currently active, the
object is made active from its marshalled state and then passed the invocation. It uses
one activator on each server computer.
The CORBA case study in Chapter 8 describes the implementation repository – a
weak form of activator that starts services containing objects in an initial state.
Persistent object stores • An object that is guaranteed to live between activations of
processes is called a persistent object. Persistent objects are generally managed by
persistent object stores, which store their state in a marshalled form on disk. Examples
include the CORBA persistent state service (see Chapter 8), Java Data Objects
[java.sun.com VIII] and Persistent Java [Jordan 1996; java.sun.com IV].
In general, a persistent object store will manage very large numbers of persistent
objects, which are stored on disk or in a database until they are needed. They will be
activated when their methods are invoked by other objects. Activation is generally
designed to be transparent – that is, the invoker should not be able to tell whether an
object is already in main memory or has to be activated before its method is invoked.
Persistent objects that are no longer needed in main memory can be passivated. In most
cases, objects are saved in the persistent object store whenever they reach a consistent
state, for the sake of fault tolerance. The persistent object store needs a strategy for
deciding when to passivate objects. For example, it may do so in response to a request
in the program that activated the objects, either at the end of a transaction or when the
program exits. Persistent object stores generally attempt to optimize passivation by
saving only those objects that have been modified since the last time they were saved.
Persistent object stores generally allow collections of related persistent objects to
have human-readable names such as pathnames or URLs. In practice, each human-
readable name is associated with the root of a connected set of persistent objects.
There are two approaches to deciding whether an object is persistent or not:
(cid:129) The persistent object store maintains some persistent roots, and any object that is
reachable from a persistent root is defined to be persistent. This approach is used
by Persistent Java, Java Data Objects and PerDiS [Ferreira et al. 2000]. They
make use of a garbage collector to dispose of objects that are no longer reachable
from the persistent roots.
(cid:129) The persistent object store provides some classes on which persistence is based –
persistent objects belong to their subclasses. For example, in Arjuna [Parrington
et al. 1995], persistent objects are based on C++ classes that provide transactions
and recovery. Unwanted objects must be deleted explicitly.
Some persistent object stores, such as PerDiS and Khazana [Carter et al. 1998], allow
objects to be activated in multiple caches local to users, instead of in servers. In this case,
a cache consistency protocol is required. Further details on consistency models can be
found on the companion web site, in the chapter from the fourth edition on distributed
shared memory [www.cdk5.net/dsm].


===== page 233 =====
SECTION 5.4 REMOTE METHOD INVOCATION 215
Object location • Section 4.3.4 describes a form of remote object reference that contains
the Internet address and port number of the process that created the remote object as a
way of guaranteeing uniqueness. This form of remote object reference can also be used
as an address for a remote object, so long as that object remains in the same process for
the rest of its life. But some remote objects will exist in a series of different processes,
possibly on different computers, throughout their lifetime. In this case, a remote object
reference cannot act as an address. Clients making invocations require both a remote
object reference and an address to which to send invocations.
Alocation service helps clients to locate remote objects from their remote object
references. It uses a database that maps remote object references to their probable
current locations – the locations are probable because an object may have migrated again
since it was last heard of. For example, the Clouds system [Dasgupta et al. 1991] and
the Emerald system [Jul et al. 1988] used a cache/broadcast scheme in which a member
of a location service on each computer holds a small cache of remote object reference-
to-location mappings. If a remote object reference is in the cache, that address is tried
for the invocation and will fail if the object has moved. To locate an object that has
moved or whose location is not in the cache, the system broadcasts a request. This
scheme may be enhanced by the use of forward location pointers, which contain hints as
to the new location of an object. Another example is the resolution service required for
resolving the URN of a resource into its current URL, mentioned in Section 9.1.
5.4.3 Distributed garbage collection
The aim of a distributed garbage collector is to ensure that if a local or remote reference
to an object is still held anywhere in a set of distributed objects, the object itself will
continue to exist, but as soon as no object any longer holds a reference to it, the object
will be collected and the memory it uses recovered.
We describe the Java distributed garbage collection algorithm, which is similar to
the one described by Birrell et al. [1995]. It is based on reference counting. Whenever a
remote object reference enters a process, a proxy will be created and will stay there for
as long as it is needed. The process where the object lives (its server) should be informed
of the new proxy at the client. Then later when there is no longer a proxy at the client,
the server should be informed. The distributed garbage collector works in cooperation
with the local garbage collectors as follows:
(cid:129) Each server process maintains a set of the names of the processes that hold remote
object references for each of its remote objects; for example, B.holders is the set
of client processes (virtual machines) that have proxies for object B. (In Figure
5.15, this set will include the client process illustrated.) This set can be held in an
additional column in the remote object table.
(cid:129) When a client C first receives a remote reference to a particular remote object, B,
it makes an addRef(B) invocation to the server of that remote object and then
creates a proxy; the server adds C to B.holders.


===== page 234 =====
216 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
(cid:129) When a client C’s garbage collector notices that a proxy for remote object B is no
longer reachable, it makes a removeRef(B) invocation to the corresponding server
and then deletes the proxy; the server removes C from B.holders.
(cid:129) When B.holders is empty, the server’s local garbage collector will reclaim the
space occupied by B unless there are any local holders.
This algorithm is intended to be carried out by means of pairwise request-reply
communication with at-most-once invocation semantics between the remote reference
modules in processes – it does not require any global synchronization. Note also that the
extra invocations made on behalf of the garbage collection algorithm do not affect every
normal RMI; they occur only when proxies are created and deleted.
There is a possibility that one client may make a removeRef(B) invocation at about
the same time as another client makes an addRef(B) invocation. If the removeRefarrives
first and B.holders is empty, the remote object B could be deleted before the addRef
arrives. To avoid this situation, if the set B.holders is empty at the time when a remote
object reference is transmitted, a temporary entry is added until the addRef arrives.
The Java distributed garbage collection algorithm tolerates communication
failures by using the following approach. The addRef and removeRef operations are
idempotent. In the case that an addRef(B) call returns an exception (meaning that the
method was either executed once or not at all), the client will not create a proxy but will
make a removeRef(B) call. The effect of removeRef is correct whether or not the addRef
succeeded. The case where removeRef fails is dealt with by leases.
The Java distributed garbage collection algorithm can tolerate the failure of client
processes. To achieve this, servers lease their objects to clients for a limited period of
time. The lease period starts when the client makes an addRef invocation to the server.
It ends either when the time has expired or when the client makes a removeRef
invocation to the server. The information stored by the server concerning each lease
contains the identifier of the client’s virtual machine and the period of the lease. Clients
are responsible for requesting the server to renew their leases before they expire.
Leases in Jini • The Jini distributed system includes a specification for leases [Arnold
et al. 1999] that can be used in a variety of situations when one object offers a resource
to another object – for example, when remote objects offer references to other objects.
Objects that offer such resources are at risk of having to maintain the resources when the
users are no longer interested or their programs have exited. To avoid complicated
protocols to discover whether the resource users are still interested, the resources are
offered for a limited period of time. The granting of the use of a resource for a period of
time is called a lease. The object offering the resource will maintain it until the time in
the lease expires. The resource users are responsible for requesting their renewal when
they expire.
The period of a lease may be negotiated between the grantor and the recipient in
Jini, although this does not happen with the leases used in Java RMI. In Jini, an object
representing a lease implements the Lease interface. It contains information about the
period of the lease and methods enabling the lease to be renewed or cancelled. The
grantor returns an instance of a Lease when it supplies a resource to another object.


===== page 235 =====
SECTION 5.5 CASE STUDY: JAVA RMI 217
5.5 Case study: Java RMI
Java RMI extends the Java object model to provide support for distributed objects in the
Java language. In particular, it allows objects to invoke methods on remote objects using
the same syntax as for local invocations. In addition, type checking applies equally to
remote invocations as to local ones. However, an object making a remote invocation is
aware that its target is remote because it must handle RemoteExceptions; and the
implementor of a remote object is aware that it is remote because it must implement the
Remote interface. Although the distributed object model is integrated into Java in a
natural way, the semantics of parameter passing differ because the invoker and target are
remote from one another.
The programming of distributed applications in Java RMI should be relatively
simple because it is a single-language system – remote interfaces are defined in the Java
language. If a multiple-language system such as CORBA is used, the programmer needs
to learn an IDL and to understand how it maps onto the implementation language.
However, even in a single-language system, the programmer of a remote object must
consider its behaviour in a concurrent environment.
In the remainder of this introduction, we give an example of a remote interface,
then discuss the parameter-passing semantics with reference to the example. Finally, we
discuss the downloading of classes and the binder. The second section of this case study
discusses how to build client and server programs for the example interface. The third
section is concerned with the design and implementation of Java RMI. For full details
of Java RMI, see the tutorial on remote invocation [java.sun.com I].
In this case study, the CORBA case study in Chapter 8 and the discussion of web
services in Chapter 9, we use a shared whiteboard as an example. This is a distributed
program that allows a group of users to share a common view of a drawing surface
containing graphical objects, such as rectangles, lines and circles, each of which has
been drawn by one of the users. The server maintains the current state of a drawing by
providing an operation for clients to inform it about the latest shape one of their users
has drawn and keeping a record of all the shapes it has received. The server also provides
operations allowing clients to retrieve the latest shapes drawn by other users by polling
the server. The server has a version number (an integer) that it increments each time a
new shape arrives and attaches to the new shape. The server provides operations
allowing clients to enquire about its version number and the version number of each
shape, so that they may avoid fetching shapes that they already have.
Remote interfaces in Java RMI • Remote interfaces are defined by extending an
interface called Remote provided in the java.rmi package. The methods must throw
RemoteException, but application-specific exceptions may also be thrown. Figure 5.16
shows an example of two remote interfaces called Shape and ShapeList. In this example,
GraphicalObject is a class that holds the state of a graphical object – for example, its
type, its position, enclosing rectangle, line colour and fill colour – and provides
operations for accessing and updating its state. GraphicalObject must implement the
Serializable interface. Consider the interface Shape first: the getVersion method returns
an integer, whereas the getAllState method returns an instance of the class
GraphicalObject. Now consider the interface ShapeList: its newShape method passes an
instance of GraphicalObject as its argument but returns an object with a remote


===== page 236 =====
218 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.16 Java Remote interfaces Shape and ShapeList
import java.rmi.*;
import java.util.Vector;
public interface Shape extends Remote {
int getVersion() throws RemoteException;
GraphicalObject getAllState() throws RemoteException; 1
}
public interface ShapeList extends Remote {
Shape newShape(GraphicalObject g) throws RemoteException; 2
Vector allShapes() throws RemoteException;
int getVersion() throws RemoteException;
}
interface (that is, a remote object) as its result. An important point to note is that both
ordinary objects and remote objects can appear as arguments and results in a remote
interface. The latter are always denoted by the name of their remote interface. In the next
subsection, we discuss how ordinary objects and remote objects are passed as arguments
and results.
Parameter and result passing • In Java RMI, the parameters of a method are assumed
to be input parameters and the result of a method is a single output parameter. Section
4.3.2 describes Java serialization, which is used for marshalling arguments and results
in Java RMI. Any object that is serializable – that is, that implements the Serializable
interface – can be passed as an argument or result in Java RMI. All primitive types and
remote objects are serializable. Classes for arguments and result values are downloaded
to the recipient by the RMI system where necessary.
Passing remote objects: When the type of a parameter or result value is defined as
a remote interface, the corresponding argument or result is always passed as a remote
object reference. For example, in Figure 5.16, line 2, the return value of the method
newShapeis defined as Shape – a remote interface. When a remote object reference
is received, it can be used to make RMI calls on the remote object to which it refers.
Passing non-remote objects: All serializable non-remote objects are copied and
passed by value. For example, in Figure 5.16 (lines 2 and 1) the argument of
newShape and the return value of getAllState are both of type GraphicalObject,
which is serializable and is passed by value. When an object is passed by value, a new
object is created in the receiver’s process. The methods of this new object can be
invoked locally, possibly causing its state to differ from the state of the original object
in the sender’s process.
Thus, in our example, the client uses the method newShape to pass an instance of
GraphicalObject to the server; the server makes a remote object of type Shape
containing the state of the GraphicalObject and returns a remote object reference to it.
The arguments and return values in a remote invocation are serialized to a stream using
the method described in Section 4.3.2, with the following modifications:


===== page 237 =====
SECTION 5.5 CASE STUDY: JAVA RMI 219
Figure 5.17 TheNaming class of Java RMIregistry
void rebind (String name, Remote obj)
This method is used by a server to register the identifier of a remote object by name,
as shown in Figure 5.18, line 3.
void bind (String name, Remote obj)
This methodcan alternatively be used by a server to register a remote object by name,
but if the name is already bound to a remote object reference an exception is thrown.
void unbind (String name, Remote obj)
This method removes a binding.
Remote lookup(String name)
This method is used by clients to look up a remote object by name, as shown in Figure
5.20, line 1. A remote object reference is returned.
String [] list()
This method returns an array of Strings containing the names bound in the registry.
1. Whenever an object that implements the Remote interface is serialized, it is
replaced by its remote object reference, which contains the name of its (the remote
object’s) class.
2. When any object is serialized, its class information is annotated with the location
of the class (as a URL), enabling the class to be downloaded by the receiver.
Downloading of classes • Java is designed to allow classes to be downloaded from one
virtual machine to another. This is particularly relevant to distributed objects that
communicate by means of remote invocation. We have seen that non-remote objects are
passed by value and remote objects are passed by reference as arguments and results of
RMIs. If the recipient does not already possess the class of an object passed by value, its
code is downloaded automatically. Similarly, if the recipient of a remote object
reference does not already possess the class for a proxy, its code is downloaded
automatically. This has two advantages:
1. There is no need for every user to keep the same set of classes in their working
environment.
2. Both client and server programs can make transparent use of instances of new
classes whenever they are added.
As an example, consider the whiteboard program and suppose that its initial
implementation of GraphicalObject does not allow for text. A client with a textual
object can implement a subclass of GraphicalObject that deals with text and pass an
instance to the server as an argument of the newShape method. After that, other clients
may retrieve the instance using the getAllState method. The code of the new class will
be downloaded automatically from the first client to the server and then to other clients
as needed.


===== page 238 =====
220 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.18 Java class ShapeListServer with main method
import java.rmi.*;
import java.rmi.server.UnicastRemoteObject;
public class ShapeListServer{
public static void main(String args[]){
System.setSecurityManager(new RMISecurityManager());
try{
ShapeList aShapeList = new ShapeListServant(); 1
ShapeList stub = 2
(ShapeList) UnicastRemoteObject.exportObject(aShapeList,0);3
Naming.rebind("//bruno.ShapeList", stub ); 4
System.out.println("ShapeList server ready");
}catch(Exception e) {
System.out.println("ShapeList server main " + e.getMessage());}
}
}
RMIregistry • The RMIregistry is the binder for Java RMI. An instance of RMIregistry
should normally run on every server computer that hosts remote objects. It maintains a
table mapping textual, URL-style names to references to remote objects hosted on that
computer. It is accessed by methods of the Naming class, whose methods take as an
argument a URL-formatted string of the form:
//computerName:port/objectName
where computerName and port refer to the location of the RMIregistry. If they are
omitted, the local computer and default port are assumed. Its interface offers the
methods shown in Figure 5.17, in which the exceptions are not listed – all of the methods
can throw a RemoteException.
Used in this way, clients must direct their lookup enquiries to particular hosts.
Alternatively, it is possible to set up a system-wide binding service. To achieve this, it
is necessary to run an instance of the RMIregistry in the networked environment and
then use the class LocateRegistry, which is in java.rmi.registry, to discover this registry.
More specifically, this class contains a getRegistry method that returns an object of type
Registry representing the remote binding service:
public static Registry getRegistry() throws RemoteException
Following this, it is then necessary to issue a call of rebind on this returned Registry
object to establish a connection with the remote RMIregistry.
5.5.1 Building client and server programs
This section outlines the steps necessary to produce client and server programs that use
theRemote interfaces Shape and ShapeList shown in Figure 5.16. The server program is
a simplified version of a whiteboard server that implements the two interfaces Shape and
ShapeList. We describe a simple polling client program and then introduce the callback


===== page 239 =====
SECTION 5.5 CASE STUDY: JAVA RMI 221
Figure 5.19 Java class ShapeListServant implements interface ShapeList
import java.util.Vector;
public class ShapeListServant implements ShapeList {
private Vector theList; // contains the list of Shapes
private int version;
public ShapeListServant(){...}
public Shape newShape(GraphicalObject g) { 1
version++;
Shape s = new ShapeServant( g, version); 2
theList.addElement(s);
return s;
}
public Vector allShapes(){...}
public int getVersion() { ... }
}
technique that can be used to avoid the need to poll the server. Complete versions of the
classes illustrated in this section are available at www.cdk5.net/rmi.
Server program • The server is a whiteboard server: it represents each shape as a remote
object instantiated by a servant that implements the Shape interface and holds the state
of a graphical object as well as its version number; it represents its collection of shapes
by using another servant that implements the ShapeList interface and holds a collection
of shapes in a Vector.
The server program consists of a main method and a servant class to implement
each of its remote interfaces. The main method of the server class is shown in Figure
5.18, with the key steps contained in the lines marked 1 to 4:
(cid:129) In line 1, the server creates an instance of ShapeListServant.
(cid:129) Lines 2 and 3 use the method exportObject (defined on UnicastRemoteObject) to
make this object available to the RMI runtime, thereby making it available to
receive incoming invocations. The second parameter of exportObject specifies the
TCP port to be used for incoming invocations. It is normal practice to set this to
zero, implying that an anonymous port will be used (one that is generated by the
RMI runtime). Using UnicastRemoteObject ensures that the resultant object lives
only as long as the process in which it is created (an alternative is to make this an
Activatable object that is, one that lives beyond the server instance).
(cid:129) Finally, line 4 binds the remote object to a name in the RMIregistry. Note that the
value bound to the name is a remote object reference, and its type is the type of its
remote interface – ShapeList.
The two servant classes are ShapeListServant, which implements the ShapeList
interface, and ShapeServant, which implements the Shape interface. Figure 5.19 gives
an outline of the class ShapeListServant.


===== page 240 =====
222 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.20 Java client of ShapeList
import java.rmi.*;
import java.rmi.server.*;
import java.util.Vector;
public class ShapeListClient{
public static void main(String args[]){
System.setSecurityManager(new RMISecurityManager());
ShapeList aShapeList = null;
try{
aShapeList = (ShapeList) Naming.lookup("//bruno.ShapeList"); 1
Vector sList = aShapeList.allShapes(); 2
} catch(RemoteException e) {System.out.println(e.getMessage());
}catch(Exception e) {System.out.println("Client: " + e.getMessage());}
}
}
The implementation of the methods of the remote interface in a servant class is
completely straightforward because it can be done without any concern for the details of
communication. Consider the method newShape in Figure 5.19 (line 1), which could be
called a factory method because it allows the client to request the creation of a servant.
It uses the constructor of ShapeServant, which creates a new servant containing the
GraphicalObject and version number passed as arguments. The type of the return value
ofnewShape is Shape – the interface implemented by the new servant. Before returning,
the method newShape adds the new shape to its vector that contains the list of shapes
(line 2).
The main method of a server needs to create a security manager to enable Java
security to apply the protection appropriate for an RMI server. A default security
manager called RMISecurityManager is provided. It protects the local resources to
ensure that the classes that are loaded from remote sites cannot have any effect on
resources such as files, but it differs from the standard Java security manager in allowing
the program to provide its own class loader and to use reflection. If an RMI server sets
no security manager, proxies and classes can only be loaded from the local classpath, in
order to protect the program from code that is downloaded as a result of remote method
invocations.
Client program • A simplified client for the ShapeList server is illustrated in Figure
5.20. Any client program needs to get started by using a binder to look up a remote
object reference. Our client sets a security manager and then looks up a remote object
reference for the remote object using the lookup operation of the RMIregistry (line 1).
Having obtained an initial remote object reference, the client continues by sending RMIs
to that remote object or to others discovered during its execution according to the needs
of its application. In our example, the client invokes the method allShapes in the remote
object (line 2) and receives a vector of remote object references to all of the shapes
currently stored in the server. If the client was implementing a whiteboard display, it
would use the server’s getAllState method in the Shape interface to retrieve each of the
graphical objects in the vector and display them in a window. Each time the user finishes


===== page 241 =====
SECTION 5.5 CASE STUDY: JAVA RMI 223
drawing a graphical object, it will invoke the method newShape in the server, passing
the new graphical object as its argument. The client will keep a record of the latest
version number at the server, and from time to time it will invoke getVersion at the
server to find out whether any new shapes have been added by other users. If so, it will
retrieve and display them.
Callbacks • The general idea behind callbacks is that instead of clients polling the
server to find out whether some event has occurred, the server should inform its clients
whenever that event occurs. The term callback is used to refer to a server’s action of
notifying clients about an event. Callbacks can be implemented in RMI as follows:
(cid:129) The client creates a remote object that implements an interface that contains a
method for the server to call. We refer to this as a callback object.
(cid:129) The server provides an operation allowing interested clients to inform it of the
remote object references of their callback objects. It records these in a list.
(cid:129) Whenever an event of interest occurs, the server calls the interested clients. For
example, the whiteboard server would call its clients whenever a graphical object
is added.
The use of callbacks avoids the need for a client to poll the objects of interest in the
server and its attendant disadvantages:
(cid:129) The performance of the server may be degraded by the constant polling.
(cid:129) Clients cannot notify users of updates in a timely manner.
However, callbacks have problems of their own. First, the server needs to have up-to-
date lists of the clients’ callback objects, but clients may not always inform the server
before they exit, leaving the server with incorrect lists. The leasing technique discussed
in Section 5.4.3 can be used to overcome this problem. The second problem associated
with callbacks is that the server needs to make a series of synchronous RMIs to the
callback objects in the list. See Chapter 6 for some ideas about solving the second
problem.
We illustrate the use of callbacks in the context of the whiteboard application. The
WhiteboardCallback interface could be defined as follows:
public interface WhiteboardCallback implements Remote {
void callback(int version) throws RemoteException;
};
This interface is implemented as a remote object by the client, enabling the server to
send the client a version number whenever a new object is added. But before the server
can do this, the client needs to inform the server about its callback object. To make this
possible, the ShapeList interface requires additional methods such as register and
deregister, defined as follows:
int register(WhiteboardCallback callback) throws RemoteException;
void deregister(int callbackId) throws RemoteException;
After the client has obtained a reference to the remote object with the ShapeList interface
(for example, in Figure 5.20, line 1) and created an instance of its callback object, it uses
the register method of ShapeList to inform the server that it is interested in receiving


===== page 242 =====
224 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
Figure 5.21 Classes supporting Java RMI
RemoteObject
RemoteServer
Activatable UnicastRemoteObject
<servant class>
callbacks. The register method returns an integer (the callbackId) referring to the
registration. When the client is finished it should call deregister to inform the server it
no longer requires callbacks. The server is responsible for keeping a list of interested
clients and notifying all of them each time its version number increases.
5.5.2 Design and implementation of Java RMI
The original Java RMI system used all of the components shown in Figure 5.15. But in
Java 1.2, the reflection facilities were used to make a generic dispatcher and to avoid the
need for skeletons. Prior to J2SE 5.0, the client proxies were generated by a compiler
called rmic from the compiled server classes (not from the definitions of the remote
interfaces). However, this step is no longer necessary with recent versions of J2SE,
which contain support for the dynamic generation of stub classes at runtime.
Use of reflection • Reflection is used to pass information in request messages about the
method to be invoked. This is achieved with the help of the class Method in the reflection
package. Each instance of Method represents the characteristics of a particular method,
including its class and the types of its arguments, return value and exceptions. The most
interesting feature of this class is that an instance of Method can be invoked on an object
of a suitable class by means of its invoke method. The invoke method requires two
arguments: the first specifies the object to receive the invocation and the second is an
array of Object containing the arguments. The result is returned as type Object.
To return to the use of the Method class in RMI: the proxy has to marshal
information about a method and its arguments into the request message. For the method
it marshals an object of class Method. It puts the arguments into an array of Objects and
then marshals that array. The dispatcher unmarshals the Method object and its
arguments in the array of Objects from the request message. As usual, the remote object
reference of the target will have been unmarshalled and the corresponding local object
reference obtained from the remote reference module. The dispatcher then calls the
Method object’s invoke method, supplying the target and the array of argument values.
When the method has been executed, the dispatcher marshals the result or any
exceptions into the reply message. Thus the dispatcher is generic – that is, the same
dispatcher can be used for all classes of remoteobject, and no skeletons are required.
Java classes supporting RMI • Figure 5.21 shows the inheritance structure of the classes
supporting Java RMI servers. The only class that the programmer need be aware of is
UnicastRemoteObject, which every simple servant class needs to extend. The class
UnicastRemoteObject extends an abstract class called RemoteServer, which provides


===== page 243 =====
SECTION 5.6 SUMMARY 225
abstract versions of the methods required by remote servers. UnicastRemoteObject was
the first example of RemoteServer to be provided. Another called Activatable is
available for providing activatable objects. Further alternatives might provide for
replicated objects. The class RemoteServer is a subclass of RemoteObject that has an
instance variable holding the remote object reference and provides the following
methods:
equals This method compares remote object references.
toString: This method gives the contents of the remote object reference as a String.
readObject, writeObject: These methods deserialize/serialize remote objects.
In addition, the instanceOf operator can be used to test remote objects.
5.6 Summary
This chapter has discussed three paradigms for distributed programming – request-reply
protocols, remote procedure calls and remote method invocation. All of these paradigms
provide mechanisms for distributed independent entities (processes, objects,
components or services) to communicate directly with one another.
Request-reply protocols provide lightweight and minimal support for client-server
computing. Such protocols are often used in environments where overheads of
communication must be minimized – for example, in embedded systems. Their more
common role is to support either RPC or RMI, as discussed below.
The remote procedure call approach was a significant breakthrough in distributed
systems, providing higher-level support for programmers by extending the concept of a
procedure call to operate in a networked environment. This provides important levels of
transparency in distributed systems. However, due to their different failure and
performance characteristics and to the possibility of concurrent access to servers, it is
not necessarily a good idea to make remote procedure calls appear to be exactly the same
as local calls. Remote procedure calls provide a range of invocation semantics, from
maybe invocations through to at-most-once semantics.
The distributed object model is an extension of the local object model used in
object-based programming languages. Encapsulated objects form useful components in
a distributed system, since encapsulation makes them entirely responsible for managing
their own state, and local invocation of methods can be extended to remote invocation.
Each object in a distributed system has a remote object reference (a globally unique
identifier) and a remote interface that specifies which of its operations can be invoked
remotely.
Middleware implementations of RMI provide components (including proxies,
skeletons and dispatchers) that hide the details of marshalling, message passing and
locating remote objects from client and server programmers. These components can be
generated by an interface compiler. Java RMI extends local invocation to remote
invocation using the same syntax, but remote interfaces must be specified by extending
an interface called Remote and making each method throw a RemoteException. This
ensures that programmers know when they make remote invocations or implement
remote objects, enabling them to handle errors or to design objects suitable for
concurrent access.


===== page 244 =====
226 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
EXERCISES
5.1 Define a class whose instances represent request and reply messages as illustrated in
Figure 5.4. The class should provide a pair of constructors, one for request messages and
the other for reply messages, showing how the request identifier is assigned. It should
also provide a method to marshal itself into an array of bytes and to unmarshal an array
of bytes into an instance. page 188
5.2 Program each of the three operations of the request-reply protocol in Figure 5.3, using
UDP communication, but without adding any fault-tolerance measures. You should use
the classes you defined in the previous chapter for remote object references (Exercise
4.13) and above for request and reply messages (Exercise 5.1). page 187
5.3 Give an outline of the server implementation, showing how the operations getRequest
and sendReply are used by a server that creates a new thread to execute each client
request. Indicate how the server will copy the requestId from the request message into
the reply message and how it will obtain the client IP address and port. page 187
5.4 Define a new version of the doOperation method that sets a timeout on waiting for the
reply message. After a timeout, it retransmits the request message n times. If there is still
no reply, it informs the caller. page 188
5.5 Describe a scenario in which a client could receive a reply from an earlier call.
page 187
5.6 Describe the ways in which the request-reply protocol masks the heterogeneity of
operating systems and of computer networks. page 187
5.7 Discuss whether the following operations are idempotent:
i) pressing a lift (elevator) request button;
ii) writing data to a file;
iii) appending data to a file.
Is it a necessary condition for idempotence that the operation should not be associated
with any state? page 190
5.8 Explain the design choices that are relevant to minimizing the amount of reply data held
at a server. Compare the storage requirements when the RR and RRA protocols are used.
page 191
5.9 Assume the RRA protocol is in use. How long should servers retain unacknowledged
reply data? Should servers repeatedly send the reply in an attempt to receive an
acknowledgement? page 191
5.10 Why might the number of messages exchanged in a protocol be more significant to
performance than the total amount of data sent? Design a variant of the RRA protocol
in which the acknowledgement is piggy-backed on – that is, transmitted in the same
message as – the next request where appropriate, and otherwise sent as a separate
message. (Hint: use an extra timer in the client.) page 191


===== page 245 =====
EXERCISES 227
5.11 AnElection interface provides two remote methods:
vote: This method has two parameters through which the client supplies the name
of a candidate (a string) and the ‘voter’s number’ (an integer used to ensure each
user votes once only). The voter’s numbers are allocated sparsely from the range
of integers to make them hard to guess.
result: This method has two parameters through which the server supplies the
client with the name of a candidate and the number of votes for that candidate.
Which of the parameters of these two procedures are input and which are output
parameters? page 195
5.12 Discuss the invocation semantics that can be achieved when the request-reply protocol
is implemented over a TCP/IP connection, which guarantees that data is delivered in the
order sent, without loss or duplication. Take into account all of the conditions causing a
connection to be broken. Section 4.2.4 and page 198
5.13 Define the interface to the Election service in CORBA IDL and Java RMI. Note that
CORBA IDL provides the type long for 32-bit integers. Compare the methods in the two
languages for specifying input and output arguments. Figure 5.8,Figure 5.16
5.14 TheElection service must ensure that a vote is recorded whenever any user thinks they
have cast a vote.
Discuss the effect of maybe call semantics on the Election service.
Wouldat-least-once call semantics be acceptable for the Election service or would you
recommendat-most-once call semantics? page 199
5.15 A request-reply protocol is implemented over a communication service with omission
failures to provide at-least-once invocation semantics. In the first case the implementor
assumes an asynchronous distributed system. In the second case the implementor
assumes that the maximum time for the communication and the execution of a remote
method is T. In what way does the latter assumption simplify the implementation?
page 198
5.16 Outline an implementation for the Election service that ensures that its records remain
consistent when it is accessed concurrently by multiple clients. page 199
5.17 Assume the Election service is implemented in RMI and must ensure that all votes are
safely stored even when the server process crashes. Explain how this can be achieved
with reference to the implementation outline in your answer to Exercise 5.16.
pages 213–214
5.18 Show how to use Java reflection to construct the client proxy class for the Election
interface. Give the details of the implementation of one of the methods in this class,
which should call the method doOperation with the following signature:
byte[] doOperation (RemoteObjectRef o, Method m, byte[] arguments);
Hint: an instance variable of the proxy class should hold a remote object reference (see
Exercise 4.13). Figure 5.3, page 224


===== page 246 =====
228 CHAPTER 5 REMOTE INVOCATION
5.19 Show how to generate a client proxy class using a language such as C++ that does not
support reflection, for example from the CORBA interface definition given in your
answer to Exercise 5.13. Give the details of the implementation of one of the methods
in this class, which should call the method doOperation defined in Figure 5.3.
page 211
5.20 Explain how to use Java reflection to construct a generic dispatcher. Give Java code for
a dispatcher whose signature is:
public void dispatch(Object target, Method aMethod, byte[] args)
The arguments supply the target object, the method to be invoked and the arguments for
that method in an array of bytes. page 224
5.21 Exercise 5.18 required the client to convert Object arguments into an array of bytes
before invoking doOperation and Exercise 5.20 required the dispatcher to convert an
array of bytes into an array of Objects before invoking the method. Discuss the
implementation of a new version of doOperation with the following signature:
Object[] doOperation (RemoteObjectRef o, Method m, Object[] arguments);
which uses the ObjectOutputStream and ObjectInputStream classes to stream the
request and reply messages between client and server over a TCP connection. How
would these changes affect the design of the dispatcher? Section 4.3.2 and page 224
5.22 A client makes remote method invocations to a server. The client takes 5 milliseconds
to compute the arguments for each request, and the server takes 10 milliseconds to
process each request. The local operating system processing time for each send or
receive operation is 0.5 milliseconds, and the network time to transmit each request or
reply message is 3 milliseconds. Marshalling or unmarshalling takes 0.5 milliseconds
per message.
Calculate the time taken by the client to generate and return from two requests:
(i) if it is single-threaded;
(ii) if it has two threads that can make requests concurrently on a single
processor.
You can ignore context-switching times. Is there a need for asynchronous invocation if
the client and server processes are threaded? page 213
5.23 Design a remote object table that can support distributed garbage collection as well as
translating between local and remote object references. Give an example involving
several remote objects and proxies at various sites to illustrate the use of the table. Show
the changes in the table when an invocation causes a new proxy to be created. Then show
the changes in the table when one of the proxies becomes unreachable. page 215
5.24 A simpler version of the distributed garbage collection algorithm described in Section
5.4.3 just invokes addRef at the site where a remote object lives whenever a proxy is
created and removeRef whenever a proxy is deleted. Outline all the possible effects of
communication and process failures on the algorithm. Suggest how to overcome each of
these effects, but without using leases. page 215


===== page 247 =====
6
INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Group communication
6.3 Publish-subscribe systems
6.4 Message queues
6.5 Shared memory approaches
6.6 Summary
This chapter completes our tour of communication paradigms by examining indirect
communication; it builds on our studies of interprocess communication and remote
invocation in Chapters 4 and 5, respectively. The essence of indirect communication is to
communicate through an intermediary and hence have no direct coupling between the
sender and the one or more receivers. The important concepts of space and time
uncoupling are also introduced.
The chapter examines a range of indirect communication techniques:
• group communication, in which communication is via a group abstraction with the
sender unaware of the identity of the recipients;
• publish-subscribe systems, a family of approaches that all share the common
characteristic of disseminating events to multiple recipients through an
intermediary;
• message queue systems, wherein messages are directed to the familiar abstraction
of a queue with receivers extracting messages from such queues;
• shared memory–based approaches, including distributed shared memory and tuple
space approaches, which present an abstraction of a global shared memory to
programmers.
Case studies are used throughout the chapter to illustrate the main concepts introduced.
229


===== page 248 =====
230 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
6.1 Introduction
This chapter concludes our examination of communication paradigms by examining
indirect communication, building on the studies of interprocess communication and
remote invocation in Chapters 4 and 5, respectively. Indirection is a fundamental
concept in computer science, and its ubiquity and importance are captured nicely by the
following quote, which emerged from the Titan Project at the University of Cambridge
and is attributable to Roger Needham, Maurice Wilkes and David Wheeler:
All problems in computer science can be solved by another level of indirection.
In terms of distributed systems, the concept of indirection is increasingly applied to
communication paradigms.
Indirect communication is defined as communication between entities in a
distributed system through an intermediary with no direct coupling between the sender
and the receiver(s). The precise nature of the intermediary varies from approach to
approach, as will be seen in the rest of this chapter. In addition, the precise nature of
coupling varies significantly between systems, and again this will be brought out in the
text that follows. Note the optional plural associated with the receiver; this signifies that
many indirect communication paradigms explicitly support one-to-many communication.
The techniques considered in Chapters 4 and 5 are all based on a direct coupling
between a sender and a receiver, and this leads to a certain amount of rigidity in the
system in terms of dealing with change. To illustrate this, consider a simple client-server
interaction. Because of the direct coupling, it is more difficult to replace a server with
an alternative one offering equivalent functionality. Similarly, if the server fails, this
directly affects the client, which must explicitly deal with the failure. In contrast,
indirect communication avoids this direct coupling and hence inherits interesting
properties. The literature refers to two key properties stemming from the use of an
intermediary:
Space uncoupling, in which the sender does not know or need to know the identity
of the receiver(s), and vice versa. Because of this space uncoupling, the system
developer has many degrees of freedom in dealing with change: participants (senders
or receivers) can be replaced, updated, replicated or migrated.
Time uncoupling, in which the sender and receiver(s) can have independent
lifetimes. In other words, the sender and receiver(s) do not need to exist at the same
time to communicate. This has important benefits, for example, in more volatile
environments where senders and receivers may come and go.
For these reasons, indirect communication is often used in distributed systems where
change is anticipated – for example, in mobile environments where users may rapidly
connect to and disconnect from the global network – and must be managed to provide
more dependable services. Indirect communication is also heavily used for event
dissemination in distributed systems where the receivers may be unknown and liable to
change – for example, in managing event feeds in financial systems, as featured in
Chapter 1. Indirect communication is also exploited in key parts of the Google
infrastructure, as discussed in the major case study in Chapter 21.


===== page 249 =====
SECTION 6.1 INTRODUCTION 231
Figure 6.1 Space and time coupling in distributed systems
Time-coupled Time-uncoupled
Properties: Communication directed Properties: Communication directed
towards a given receiver or receivers; towards a given receiver or receivers;
receiver(s) must exist at that moment in sender(s) and receiver(s) can have
Space coupling
time independent lifetimes
Examples: Message passing, remote Examples: See Exercise 6.3
invocation (see Chapters 4 and 5)
Properties: Sender does not need to Properties: Sender does not need to know
know the identity of the receiver(s); the identity of the receiver(s); sender(s)
receiver(s) must exist at that moment in and receiver(s) can have independent
Space uncoupling
time lifetimes
Examples: IP multicast (see Chapter 4) Examples: Most indirect communication
paradigms covered in this chapter
The discussion above charts the advantages associated with indirect
communication. The main disadvantage is that there will inevitably be a performance
overhead introduced by the added level of indirection. Indeed, the quote above on
indirection is often paired by the following quote, attributable to Jim Gray:
There is no performance problem that cannot be solved by eliminating a
level of indirection.
In addition, systems developed using indirect communication can be more difficult to
manage precisely because of the lack of any direct (space or time) coupling.
A closer look at space and time uncoupling • It may be assumed that indirection implies
both space and time uncoupling, but this is not always the case. The precise relationship
is summarized in Figure 6.1.
From this table, it is clear that most of the techniques considered in this book are
either coupled in both time and space or indeed uncoupled in both dimensions. The top-
left box represents the communication paradigms featured in Chapters 4 and 5 where
communication is direct with no space or time uncoupling. For example, message
passing is both directed towards a particular entity and requires the receiver to be present
at the time of the message send (but see Exercise 6.2 for an added dimension introduced
by DNS name resolution). The range of remote invocation paradigms are also coupled
in both space and time. The bottom-right box represents the main indirect
communication paradigms that exhibit both properties. A small number of
communication paradigms sit outside these two areas:
(cid:129) IP multicast, as featured in Chapter 4,is space-uncoupled but time-coupled. It is
space-uncoupled because messages are directed towards the multicast group, not
any particular receiver. It is time-coupled, though, as all receivers must exist at the
time of the message send to receive the multicast. Some implementations of group
communication and indeed publish-subscribe systems, also fall into this category
(see Section 6.6). This example illustrates the importance of persistency in the


===== page 250 =====
232 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
communication channel to achieve time uncoupling – that is, the communication
paradigm must store messages so that they can be delivered when the receiver(s)
is ready to receive. IP multicast does not support this level of persistency.
(cid:129) The case in which communication is space-coupled but time-uncoupled is more
subtle. Space coupling implies that the sender knows the identity of a specific
receiver or receivers, but time uncoupling implies that the receiver or receivers
need not exist at the time of sending. Exercises 6.3 and 6.4 invite the reader to
consider whether such a paradigm exists or could be constructed.
Returning to our definition, we treat all paradigms that involve an intermediary as
indirect and recognize that the precise level of coupling will vary from system to system.
We revisit the properties of different indirect communication paradigms in Section 6.6,
once we have had a chance to study the precise characteristics of each approach.
The relationship with asynchronous communication • Note that, to fully understand this
area, it is important to distinguish between asynchronous communication (as defined in
Chapter 4) and time uncoupling. In asynchronous communication, a sender sends a
message and then continues (without blocking), and hence there is no need to meet in
time with the receiver to communicate. Time uncoupling adds the extra dimension that
the sender and receiver(s) can have independent existences; for example, the receiver
may not exist at the time communication is initiated. Eugster et al. also recognize the
important distinction between asynchronous communication (synchronization
uncoupling) and time uncoupling [2003].
Many of the techniques examined in this chapter are time-uncoupled and
asynchronous, but a few, such as the MessageDispatcher and RpcDispatcher operations
in JGroups, discussed in Section 6.2.3, offer a synchronous service over indirect
communication.
The rest of the chapter examines specific examples of indirect communication
starting with group communication in Section 6.2. Section 6.3 then examines the
fundamentals of publish-subscribe systems, with Section 6.4 examining the contrasting
approach offered by message queues. Following this, Section 6.5 considers approaches
based on shared memory abstractions, specifically distributed shared memory and tuple
space–based approaches.
6.2 Group communication
Group communication provides our first example of an indirect communication
paradigm. Group communication offers a service whereby a message is sent to a group
and then this message is delivered to all members of the group. In this action, the sender
is not aware of the identities of the receivers. Group communication represents an
abstraction over multicast communication and may be implemented over IP multicast or
an equivalent overlay network, adding significant extra value in terms of managing
group membership, detecting failures and providing reliability and ordering guarantees.
With the added guarantees, group communication is to IP multicast what TCP is to the
point-to-point service in IP.


===== page 251 =====
SECTION 6.2 GROUP COMMUNICATION 233
Group communication is an important building block for distributed systems, and
particularly reliable distributed systems, with key areas of application including:
(cid:129) the reliable dissemination of information to potentially large numbers of clients,
including in the financial industry, where institutions require accurate and up-to-
date access to a wide variety of information sources;
(cid:129) support for collaborative applications, where again events must be disseminated
to multiple users to preserve a common user view – for example, in multiuser
games, as discussed in Chapter 1;
(cid:129) support for a range of fault-tolerance strategies, including the consistent update of
replicated data (as discussed in detail in Chapter 18) or the implementation of
highly available (replicated) servers;
(cid:129) support for system monitoring and management, including for example load
balancing strategies.
We look at group communication in more detail below, examining the programming
model offered and the associated implementation issues. We examine the JGroups
toolkit as a case study of a group communication service.
6.2.1 The programming model
In group communication, the central concept is that of a group with associated group
membership, whereby processes may join or leave the group. Processes can then send a
message to this group and have it propagated to all members of the group with certain
guarantees in terms of reliability and ordering. Thus, group communication implements
multicast communication, in which a message is sent to all the members of the group by
a single operation. Communication to all processes in the system, as opposed to a
subgroup of them, is known as broadcast, whereas communication to a single process
is known as unicast.
The essential feature of group communication is that a process issues only one
multicast operation to send a message to each of a group of processes (in Java this
operation is aGroup.send(aMessage)) instead of issuing multiple send operations to
individual processes.
The use of a single multicast operation instead of multiple send operations
amounts to much more than a convenience for the programmer: it enables the
implementation to be efficient in its utilization of bandwidth. It can take steps to send
the message no more than once over any communication link, by sending it over a
distribution tree; and it can use network hardware support for multicast where this is
available. The implementation can also minimize the total time taken to deliver the
message to all destinations, as compared with transmitting it separately and serially.
To see these advantages, compare the bandwidth utilization and the total
transmission time taken when sending the same message from a computer in London to
two computers on the same Ethernet in Palo Alto, (a) by two separate UDP sends, and (b)
by a single IP multicast operation. In the former case, two copies of the message are sent
independently, and the second is delayed by the first. In the latter case, a set of multicast-
aware routers forward a single copy of the message from London to a router on the
destination LAN in California. That router then uses hardware multicast (provided by the
Ethernet) to deliver the message to both destinations at once, instead of sending it twice.


===== page 252 =====
234 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
The use of a single multicast operation is also important in terms of delivery
guarantees. If a process issues multiple independent send operations to individual
processes, then there is no way for the implementation to provide guarantees that affect
the group of processes as a whole. If the sender fails halfway through sending, then some
members of the group may receive the message while others do not. In addition, the
relative ordering of two messages delivered to any two group members is undefined.
Group communication, however, has the potential to offer a range of guarantees in terms
of reliability and ordering, as discussed in Section 6.2.2 below.
Group communication has been the subject of many research projects, including
the V-system [Cheriton and Zwaenepoel 1985], Chorus [Rozier et al. 1988], Amoeba
[Kaashoek et al. 1989; Kaashoek and Tanenbaum 1991], Trans/Total [Melliar-Smith et
al. 1990], Delta-4 [Powell 1991], Isis [Birman 1993], Horus [van Renesse et al. 1996],
Totem [Moser et al. 1996] and Transis [Dolev and Malki 1996] – and we shall cite other
notable work in the course of this chapter and indeed throughout the book (particularly
in Chapters 15 and 18).
Process groups and object groups • Most work on group services focuses on the
concept of process groups, that is, groups where the communicating entities are
processes. Such services are relatively low-level in that:
(cid:129) Messages are delivered to processes and no further support for dispatching is
provided.
(cid:129) Messages are typically unstructured byte arrays with no support for marshalling
of complex data types (as provided, for example, in RPC or RMI – see Chapter 5).
The level of service provided by process groups is therefore similar to that of sockets,
as discussed in Chapter 4. In contrast, object groups provide a higher-level approach to
group computing. An object group is a collection of objects (normally instances of the
same class) that process the same set of invocations concurrently, with each returning
responses. Client objects need not be aware of the replication. They invoke operations
on a single, local object, which acts as a proxy for the group. The proxy uses a group
communication system to send the invocations to the members of the object group.
Object parameters and results are marshalled as in RMI and the associated calls are
dispatched automatically to the right destination objects/methods.
Electra [Maffeis 1995] is a CORBA-compliant system that supports object
groups. An Electra group can be interfaced to any CORBA-compliant application.
Electra was originally built on top of the Horus group communication system, which it
uses to manage the membership of the group and to multicast invocations. In
‘transparent mode’, the local proxy returns the first available response to a client object.
In ‘non-transparent mode’, the client object can access all the responses returned by the
group members. Electra uses an extension of the standard CORBA Object Request
Broker interface, with functions for creating and destroying object groups and managing
their membership. Eternal [Moser et al. 1998] and the Object Group Service [Guerraoui
et al. 1998] also provide CORBA-compliant support for object groups.
Despite the promise of object groups, however, process groups still dominate in
terms of usage. For example, the popular JGroups toolkit, discussed in Section 6.2.3, is
a classical process group approach.


===== page 253 =====
SECTION 6.2 GROUP COMMUNICATION 235
Figure 6.2 Open and closed groups
Closed group Open group
Other key distinctions • A wide range of group communication services has been
developed, and they vary in the assumptions they make:
Closed and open groups: Agroup is said to be closed if only members of the group
may multicast to it (Figure 6.2). A process in a closed group delivers to itself any
message that it multicasts to the group. A group is open if processes outside the group
may send to it. (The categories ‘open’ and ‘closed’ also apply with analogous
meanings to mailing lists.) Closed groups of processes are useful, for example, for
cooperating servers to send messages to one another that only they should receive.
Open groups are useful, for example, for delivering events to groups of interested
processes.
Overlapping and non-overlapping groups: Inoverlapping groups, entities (process-
es or objects) may be members of multiple groups, and non-overlapping groups im-
ply that membership does not overlap (that is, any process belongs to at most one
group).Note that in real-life systems, it is realistic to expect that group membership
will overlap.
Synchronous and asynchronous systems: There is a requirement to consider group
communication in both environments.
Such distinctions can have a significant impact on the underlying multicast algorithms.
For example, some algorithms assume that groups are closed. The same effect as
openness can be achieved with a closed group by picking a member of the group and
sending it a message (one-to-one) for it to multicast to its group. Rodrigues et al. [1998]
discuss multicast to open groups. Issues related to open and closed groups arise in
Chapter 15, when algorithms for reliability and ordering are considered. That chapter
also considers the impact of overlapping groups and whether the system is synchronous
or asynchronous on such protocols.


===== page 254 =====
236 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
6.2.2 Implementation issues
We now turn to implementation issues for group communication services, discussing the
properties of the underlying multicast service in terms of reliability and ordering and
also the key role of group membership management in dynamic environments, where
processes can join and leave or fail at any time.
Reliability and ordering in multicast • In group communication, all members of a group
must receive copies of the messages sent to the group, generally with delivery
guarantees. The guarantees include agreement on the set of messages that every process
in the group should receive and on the delivery ordering across the group members.
Group communication systems are extremely sophisticated. Even IP multicast,
which provides minimal delivery guarantees, requires a major engineering effort.
So far, we have discussed reliability and ordering in rather general terms. We now
look in more detail at what such properties mean.
Reliability in one-to-one communication was defined in Section 2.4.2 in terms of
two properties: integrity (the message received is the same as the one sent, and no
messages are delivered twice) and validity (any outgoing message is eventually
delivered). The interpretation for reliable multicast builds on these properties, with
integrity defined the same way in terms of delivering the message correctly at most once,
andvalidity guaranteeing that a message sent will eventually be delivered. To extend the
semantics to cover delivery to multiple receivers, a third property is added – that of
agreement, stating that if the message is delivered to one process, then it is delivered to
all processes in the group.
As well as reliability guarantees, group communication demands extra guarantees
in terms of the relative ordering of messages delivered to multiple destinations. Ordering
is not guaranteed by underlying interprocess communication primitives. For example, if
multicast is implemented by a series of one-to-one messages, they may be subject to
arbitrary delays. Similar problems may occur if using IP multicast. To counter this,
group communication services offer ordered multicast, with the option of one or more
of the following properties (with hybrid solutions also possible):
FIFO ordering: First-in-first-out (FIFO) ordering (also referred to as source
ordering) is concerned with preserving the order from the perspective of a sender
process, in that if a process sends one message before another, it will be delivered in
this order at all processes in the group.
Causal ordering: Causal ordering takes into account causal relationships between
messages, in that if a message happens before another message in the distributed
system this so-called causal relationship will be preserved in the delivery of the
associated messages at all processes (see Chapter 14 for a detailed discussion of the
meaning of ‘happens before’).
Total ordering: In total ordering, if a message is delivered before another message
at one process, then the same order will be preserved at all processes.
Reliability and ordering are examples of coordination and agreement in distributed
systems, and hence further consideration of this is deferred to Chapter 15, which focuses
exclusively on this topic. In particular, Chapter 15 provides more complete definitions


===== page 255 =====
SECTION 6.2 GROUP COMMUNICATION 237
Figure 6.3 The role of group membership management
Group
address
expansion
Group Leave
send
Multicast
Fail Group membership
communication
management
Join
Group
of integrity, validity, agreement and the various ordering properties and also examines
in detail algorithms to realize reliable and ordered multicast.
Group membership management • The key elements of group communication
management are summarized in Figure 6.3, which shows an open group. This diagram
illustrates the important role of group membership management in maintaining an
accurateview of the current membership, given that entities may join, leave or indeed
fail. In more detail, a group membership service has four main tasks:
Providing an interface for group membership changes: The membership service
provides operations to create and destroy process groups and to add or withdraw a
process to or from a group. In most systems, a single process may belong to several
groups at the same time (overlapping groups, as defined above). This is true of IP
multicast, for example.
Failure detection: The service monitors the group members not only in case they
should crash, but also in case they should become unreachable because of a
communication failure. The detector marks processes as Suspected or Unsuspected.
The service uses the failure detector to reach a decision about the group’s
membership: it excludes a process from membership if it is suspected to have failed
or to have become unreachable.
Notifying members of group membership changes: The service notifies the group’s
memberswhen a process is added, or when a process is excluded (through failure or
when the process is deliberately withdrawn from the group).
Performing group address expansion: When a process multicasts a message, it
supplies the group identifier rather than a list of processes in the group. The
membership management service expands the identifier into the current group


===== page 256 =====
238 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
membership for delivery. The service can coordinate multicast delivery with
membership changes by controlling address expansion. That is, it can decide
consistently where to deliver any given message, even though the membership may
be changing during delivery.
Note that IP multicast is a weak case of a group membership service, with some but not
all of these properties. It does allow processes to join or leave groups dynamically and
it performs address expansion, so that senders need only provide a single IP multicast
address as the destination for a multicast message. But IP multicast does not itself
provide group members with information about current membership, and multicast
delivery is not coordinated with membership changes. Achieving these properties is
complex and requires what is known as view-synchronous group communication.
Further consideration of this important issue is deferred to Chapter 18, which discusses
the maintenance of group views and how to realize view-synchronous group
communication in the context of supporting replication in distributed systems.
In general, the need to maintain group membership has a significant impact on the
utility of group-based approaches. In particular, group communication is most effective
in small-scale and static systems and does not operate as well in larger-scale
environments or environments with a high degree of volatility. This can be traced to the
need for a form of synchrony assumption. Ganesh et al [2003] present a more
probabilistic approach to group membership designed to operate in more large-scale and
dynamic environments, using an underlying gossip protocol (see Section 10.5.3).
Researchers have also developed group membership protocols specifically for ad hoc
networks and mobile environments [Prakash and Baldoni 1998; Roman et al. 2001; Liu
et al. 2005].
6.2.3 Case study: the JGroups toolkit
JGroups is a toolkit for reliable group communication written in Java. The toolkit is a
part of the lineage of group communication tools that have emerged from Cornell
University, building on the fundamental concepts developed in ISIS [Birman 1993],
Horus [van Renesse et al. 1996] and Ensemble [van Renesse et al. 1998]. The toolkit is
now maintained and developed by the JGroups open source community
[www.jgroups.org], which is part of the JBoss middleware community, as discussed in
Chapter 8 [www.jboss.org].
JGroups supports process groups in which processes are able to join or leave a
group, send a message to all members of the group or indeed to a single member, and
receive messages from the group. The toolkit supports a variety of reliability and
ordering guarantees, which are discussed in more detail below, and also offers a group
membership service.
The architecture of JGroups is shown in Figure 6.4, which shows the main
components of the JGroups implementation:
(cid:129) Channels represent the most primitive interface for application developers,
offering the core functions of joining, leaving, sending and receiving.
(cid:129) Building blocks offer higher-level abstractions, building on the underlying service
offered by channels.


===== page 257 =====
SECTION 6.2 GROUP COMMUNICATION 239
Figure 6.4 The architecture of JGroups
Applications
Building
blocks
Channel
CAUSAL
GMS
MERGE Protocol stack
FRAG
UDP
Network
(cid:129) Theprotocol stack provides the underlying communication protocol, constructed
as a stack of composable protocol layers.
We look at each in turn below.
Channels • A process interacts with a group through a channel object, which acts as a
handle onto a group. When created, it is disconnected, but a subsequent connect
operation binds that handle to a particular named group; if the named group does not
exist, it is implicitly created at the time of the first connect. To leave the group, the
process executes the corresponding disconnect operation. A close operation is also
provided to render the channel unusable. Note that a channel can only be connected to
one group at a time; if a process wants to connect to two or more groups, it must create
multiple channels. When connected, a process can send or receive via a channel.
Messages are sent by reliable multicast, with the precise semantics defined by the
protocol stack deployed (as discussed further below).
A range of other operations are defined on channels, most notably to return
management information associated with the channel. For example, getView returns the
current view defined in terms of the current member list, while getState returns the
historical application state associated with the group (this can be used, for example, by
a new group member to catch up with previous events).
Note that the term channel should not be confused with channel-based publish-
subscribe, as introduced in Section 6.3.1. A channel in JGroups is synonymous with an
instance of a group as defined in Section 6.2.1.


===== page 258 =====
240 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.5 Java class FireAlarmJG
import org.jgroups.JChannel;
public class FireAlarmJG {
public void raise() {
try {
JChannel channel = new JChannel();
channel.connect("AlarmChannel");
Message msg = new Message(null, null, "Fire!");
channel.send(msg);
}
catch(Exception e) {
}
}
}
We illustrate the use of channels further by a simple example, a service whereby
an intelligent fire alarm can send a “Fire!” multicast message to any registered receivers.
The code for the fire alarm is as shown in Figure 6.5.
When an alarm is raised, the first step is to create a new instance of JChannel (the
class representing channels in JGroups) and then connect to a group called
AlarmChannel. If this is the first connect, then the group will be created at this stage
(unlikely in this example, or the alarm is not going to be very effective). The constructor
for a message takes three parameters: the destination, the source and the payload. In this
case, the destination is null, which specifies that the message is to be sent to all members
(if an address is specified, it is sent to that address only). The source is also null; this
need not be provided in JGroups as it will be included automatically. The payload is an
unstructured byte array that is delivered to all members of the group through the send
method. The code to create a new instance of the FireAlarmJG class and then raise an
alarm would be:
FireAlarmJG alarm = new FireAlarmJG();
alarm.raise();
The corresponding code for the receiver end has a similar structure and is shown in
Figure 6.6. In this case, however, after connecting a receive method is called. This
method takes one parameter, a timeout. If it is set to zero, as in this case, the receive
message will block until a message is received. Note that in JGroups incoming messages
are buffered and receive returns the top element in the buffer. If no messages are present,
then receive blocks awaiting the next message. Strictly speaking, receive can return a
range of object types – for example, notification of a change in membership or of a
suspected failure of a group member (hence the cast to Message above).
A given receiver must include the following code to await an alarm:
FireAlarmConsumerJG alarmCall = new FireAlarmConsumerJG();
String msg = alarmCall.await();
System.out.println("Alarm received: " + msg);


===== page 259 =====
SECTION 6.2 GROUP COMMUNICATION 241
Figure 6.6 Java class FireAlarmConsumerJG
import org.jgroups.JChannel;
public class FireAlarmConsumerJG {
public String await() {
try {
JChannel channel = new JChannel();
channel.connect("AlarmChannel");
Message msg = (Message) channel.receive(0);
return (String) msg.GetObject();
}
catch(Exception e) {
return null;
}
}
}
Building blocks • Building blocks are higher-level abstractions on top of the channel
class discussed above. Channels are similar in level to sockets. Building blocks are
analogous to the more advanced communication paradigms discussed in Chapter 5,
offering support for commonly occurring patterns of communication (but in this case
targeted at multicast communication). Examples of building blocks in JGroups are:
(cid:129) MessageDispatcher is the most intuitive of the building blocks offered in
JGroups. In group communication, it is often useful for a sender to send a message
to a group and then wait for some or all of the replies. MessageDispatcher
supports this by providing a castMessage method that sends a message to a group
and blocks until a specified number of replies are received (for example, until a
specified number n, a majority, or all messages are received).
(cid:129) RpcDispatcher takes a specific method (together with optional parameters and
results) and then invokes this method on all objects associated with a group. As
withMessageDispatcher, the caller can block awaiting some or all of the replies.
(cid:129) NotificationBus is an implementation of a distributed event bus, in which an event
is any serializable Java object. This class is often used to implement consistency
in replicated caches.
The protocol stack • JGroups follows the architectures offered by Horus and Ensemble
by constructing protocol stacks out of protocol layers (initially referred to as micro-
protocols in the literature [van Renesse et al. 1996, 1998]). In this approach, a protocol
is a bidirectional stack of protocol layers with each layer implementing the following
two methods:
public Object up (Event evt);
public Object down (Event evt);
Protocol processing therefore happens by passing events up and down the stack. In
JGroups, events may be incoming or outgoing messages or management events, for
example related to view changes. Each layer can carry out arbitrary processing on the


===== page 260 =====
242 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
message, including modifying its contents, adding a header or indeed dropping or re-
ordering the message.
To illustrate the concept further, let us examine the protocol stack shown in Figure
6.4. This shows a protocol that consists of five layers:
(cid:129) The layer referred to as UDP is the most common transport layer in JGroups. Note
that, despite the name, this is not entirely equivalent to the UDP protocol; rather,
the layer utilizes IP multicast for sending to all members in a group and UDP
datagrams specifically for point-to-point communication. This layer therefore
assumes that IP multicast is available. If it is not, the layer can be configured to
send a series of unicast messages to members, relying on another layer for
membership discovery (in particular, a layer known as PING). For larger-scale
systems operating over wide area networks, a TCP layer may be preferred (using
the TCP protocol to send unicast messages and again relying on PING for
membership discovery).
(cid:129) FRAG implements message packetization and is configurable in terms of the
maximum message size (8,192 bytes by default).
(cid:129) MERGE is a protocol that deals with unexpected network partitioning and the
subsequent merging of subgroups after the partition. A series of alternative merge
layers are actually available, ranging from the simple to ones that deal with, for
example, state transfer.
(cid:129) GMS implements a group membership protocol to maintain consistent views of
membership across the group (see Chapter 18 for further details of algorithms for
group membership management).
(cid:129) CAUSAL implements causal ordering, introduced in Section 6.2.2 (and discussed
further in Chapter 15).
A wide range of other protocol layers are available, including protocols for FIFO and
total ordering, for membership discovery and failure detection, for encryption of
messages and for implementing flow-control strategies (see the JGroups web site for
details [www.jgroups.org]). Note that because all layers implement the same interface,
they can be combined in any order, although many of the resultant protocol stacks would
not make sense. All members of a group must share the same protocol stack.
6.3 Publish-subscribe systems
We now turn our attention to the area of publish-subscribe systems [Baldoni and
Virgillito 2005], sometimes also referred to as distributed event-based systems [Muhl et
al. 2006]. These are the most widely used of all the indirect communication techniques
discussed in this chapter. Chapter 1 has already highlighted that many classes of system
are fundamentally concerned with the communication and processing of events (for
example financial trading systems). More specifically, whereas many systems naturally
map onto a request-reply or a remote invocation pattern of interaction as discussed in
Chapter 5, many do not and are more naturally modelled by the more decoupled and
reactive style of programming offered by events.


===== page 261 =====
SECTION 6.3 PUBLISH-SUBSCRIBE SYSTEMS 243
A publish-subscribe system is a system where publishers publish structured
events to an event service and subscribers express interest in particular events through
subscriptions which can be arbitrary patterns over the structured events. For example, a
subscriber could express an interest in all events related to this textbook, such as the
availability of a new edition or updates to the related web site. The task of the publish-
subscribe system is to match subscriptions against published events and ensure the
correct delivery of event notifications. A given event will be delivered to potentially
many subscribers, and hence publish-subscribe is fundamentally a one-to-many
communications paradigm.
Applications of publish-subscribe systems • Publish-subscribe systems are used in a
wide variety of application domains, particularly those related to the large-scale
dissemination of events. Examples include:
(cid:129) financial information systems;
(cid:129) other areas with live feeds of real-time data (including RSS feeds);
(cid:129) support for cooperative working, where a number of participants need to be
informed of events of shared interest;
(cid:129) support for ubiquitous computing, including the management of events emanating
from the ubiquitous infrastructure (for example, location events);
(cid:129) a broad set of monitoring applications, including network monitoring in the
Internet.
Publish-subscribe is also a key component of Google’s infrastructure, including for
example the dissemination of events related to advertisements, such as ‘ad clicks’, to
interested parties (see Chapter 21).
To illustrate the concept further, we consider a simple dealing room system as an
example of the broader class of financial information systems.
Dealing room system: Consider a simple dealing room system whose task is to allow
dealers using computers to see the latest information about the market prices of the
stocks they deal in. The market price for a single named stock is represented by an
associated object. The information arrives in the dealing room from several different
external sources in the form of updates to some or all of the objects representing the
stocks and is collected by processes we call information providers. Dealers are typically
interested only in their own specialist stocks. A dealing room system could be
implemented by processes with two different tasks:
(cid:129) An information provider process continuously receives new trading information
from a single external source. Each of the updates is regarded as an event. The
information provider publishes such events to the publish-subscribe system for
delivery to all of the dealers who have expressed an interest in the corresponding
stock. There will be a separate information provider process for each external
source.
(cid:129) A dealer process creates a subscription representing each named stock that the
user asks to have displayed. Each subscription expresses an interest in events
related to a given stock at the relevant information provider. It then receives all the
information sent to it in notifications and displays it to the user. The
communication of notifications is illustrated in Figure 6.7.


===== page 262 =====
244 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.7 Dealing room system
Dealer's computer External Dealer's computer
source
Dealer Dealer
Notification Notification
Notification Information Notification
provider
n
o
N
otificat
N
i
otification Notification
Dealer's computer Dealer's computer
Notification
Information
provider
Notification
Notification
Dealer
Dealer
External
source
Characteristics of publish-subscribe systems • Publish-subscribe systems have two
main characteristics:
Heterogeneity: When event notifications are used as a means of communication,
components in a distributed system that were not designed to interoperate can be
made to work together. All that is required is that event-generating objects publish
the types of events they offer, and that other objects subscribe to patterns of events
and provide an interface for receiving and dealing with the resultant notifications. For
example, Bates et al. [1996] describe how publish-subscribe systems can be used to
connect heterogeneous components in the Internet. They describe a system in which
applications can be made aware of users’ locations and activities, such as using
computers, printers or electronically tagged books. They envisage its future use in the
context of a home network supporting commands such as: ‘if the children come
home, turn on the central heating’.
Asynchronicity: Notifications are sent asynchronously by event-generating
publishers to all the subscribers that have expressed an interest in them to prevent
publishers needing to synchronize with subscribers – publishers and subscribers need
to be decoupled. Mushroom [Kindberg et al. 1996] is an object-based publish-
subscribe system designed to support collaborative work, in which the user interface
displays objects representing users and information objects such as documents and
notepads within shared workspaces called networkplaces. The state of each place is
replicated at the computers of users currently in that place. Events are used to
describe changes to objects and to a user’s focus of interest. For example, an event


===== page 263 =====
SECTION 6.3 PUBLISH-SUBSCRIBE SYSTEMS 245
could specify that a particular user has entered or left a place or has performed a
particular action on an object. Each replica of any object to which particular types of
events are relevant expresses an interest in them through a subscription and receives
notifications when they occur. But subscribers to events are decoupled from objects
experiencing events, because different users are active at different times.
In addition, a variety of different delivery guarantees can be provided for notifications
– the one that is chosen should depend on the application requirements. For example, if
IP multicast is used to send notifications to a group of receivers, the failure model will
relate to the one described for IP multicast in Section 4.4.1 and will not guarantee that
any particular recipient will receive a particular notification message. This is adequate
for some applications – for example, to deliver the latest state of a player in an Internet
game – because the next update is likely to get through.
However, other applications have stronger requirements. Consider the dealing
room application: to be fair to the dealers interested in a particular stock, we require that
all the dealers for the same stock receive the same information. This implies that a
reliable multicast protocol should be used.
In the Mushroom system mentioned above, notifications about changes in object
state are delivered reliably to a server, whose responsibility it is to maintain up-to-date
copies of objects. However, notifications may also be sent to object replicas in users’
computers by means of unreliable multicast; in the case that the latter lose notifications,
they can retrieve an object’s state from the server. When the application requires it,
notifications may be ordered and sent reliably to object replicas.
Some applications have real-time requirements.These include events in a nuclear
power station or a hospital patient monitor. It is possible to design multicast protocols
that provide real-time guarantees as well as reliability and ordering in a system that
satisfies the properties of a synchronous distributed system.
We discuss publish-subscribe systems in more detail in the following sections,
considering the programming model they offer before examining some of the key
implementation challenges, particularly related to large-scale dissemination of events in
the Internet.
6.3.1 The programming model
The programming model in publish-subscribe systems is based on a small set of
operations, captured in Figure 6.8. Publishers disseminate an event e through a
publish(e) operation and subscribers express an interest in a set of events through
subscriptions. In particular, they achieve this through a subscribe(f) operation where f
refers to a filter – that is, a pattern defined over the set of all possible events. The
expressiveness of filters (and hence of subscriptions) is determined by the subscription
model; which we discuss in more detail below. Subscribers can later revoke this interest
through a corresponding unsubscribe(f) operation. When events arrive at a subscriber,
the events are delivered using a notify(e) operation.
Some systems complement the above set of operations by introducing the concept
of advertisements. With advertisements, publishers have the option of declaring the
nature of future events through an advertise(f) operation. The advertisements are defined
in terms of the types of events of interest (these happen to take the same form as filters).


===== page 264 =====
246 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.8 The publish-subscribe paradigm
Publishers Subscribers
subscribe(t1)
publish(e1)
subscribe(t2)
publish(e2)
Publish-subscribe system
notify(e1)
advertise(t1)
In other words, subscribers declare their interests in terms of subscriptions and
publishers optionally declare the styles of events they will generate through
advertisements. Advertisements can be revoked through a call of unadvertise(f).
As mentioned above, the expressiveness of publish-subscribe systems is
determined by the subscription (filter) model, with a number of schemes defined and
considered here in increasing order of sophistication:
Channel-based: In this approach, publishers publish events to named channels and
subscribers then subscribe to one of these named channels to receive all events sent
to that channel. This is a rather primitive scheme and the only one that defines a
physical channel; all other schemes employ some form of filtering over the content
of events as we shall see below. Although simple, this scheme has been used
successfully in the CORBA Event Service (see Chapter 8).
Topic-based (also referred to as subject-based): In this approach, we make the
assumption that each notification is expressed in terms of a number of fields, with one
field denoting the topic. Subscriptions are then defined in terms of the topic of
interest. This approach is equivalent to channel-based approaches, with the
difference that topics are implicitly defined in the case of channels but explicitly
declared as one of the fields in topic-based approaches. The expressiveness of topic-
based approaches can also be enhanced by introducing hierarchical organization of
topics. For example, let us consider a publish-subscribe system for this book.
Subscriptions could be defined in terms of indirect_communication or
indirect_communication/publish-subscribe. Subscribers expressing interest in the
former will receive all events related to this chapter, whereas with the latter
subscribers can instead express an interest in the more specific topic of publish-
subscribe.


===== page 265 =====
SECTION 6.3 PUBLISH-SUBSCRIBE SYSTEMS 247
Content-based: Content-based approaches are a generalization of topic-based
approaches allowing the expression of subscriptions over a range of fields in an event
notification. More specifically, a content-based filter is a query defined in terms of
compositions of constraints over the values of event attributes. For example, a
subscriber could express interest in events that relate to the topic of publish-subscribe
systems, where the system in question is the ‘CORBA Event Service’ and where the
author is ‘Tim Kindberg’ or ‘Gordon Blair’. The sophistication of the associated
query languages varies from system to system, but in general this approach is
significantly more expressive than channel- or topic-based approaches, but with
significant new implementation challenges (discussed below).
Type-based: These approaches are intrinsically linked with object-based approaches
where objects have a specified type. In type-based approaches, subscriptions are
defined in terms of types of events and matching is defined in terms of types or
subtypes of the given filter. This approach can express a range of filters, from coarse-
grained filtering based on overall type names to more fine-grained queries defining
attributes and methods of a given object. Such fine-grained filters are similar in
expressiveness to content-based approaches. The advantages of type-based
approaches are that they can be integrated elegantly into programming languages and
they can check the type correctness of subscriptions, eliminating some kinds of
subscription errors.
As well as these classical categories, a number of commercial systems are based on
subscribing directly to objects of interest. Such systems are similar to type-based
approaches in that they are intrinsically linked to object-based approaches, although
they differ by focusing on changes of state of the objects of interest rather than
predicates associated with the types of objects. They allow one object to react to a
change occurring in another object. Notifications of events are asynchronous and
determined by their receivers. In particular, in interactive applications, the actions that
the user performs on objects – for example, by manipulating a button with the mouse or
entering text in a text box via the keyboard – are seen as events that cause changes in the
objects that maintain the state of the application. The objects that are responsible for
displaying a view of the current state are notified whenever the state changes.
Rosenblum and Wolf [1997] describe a general architecture for this style of
publish-subscribe system. The main component in their architecture is an event service
that maintains a database of event notifications and of interests of subscribers. The event
service is notified of events that occur at objects of intetest. Subscribers inform the event
service about the types of events they are interested in. When an event occurs at an
object of interest a message containing the notification is sent directly to the subscribers
of that type of event.
The Jini distributed event specification described by Arnold et al. [1999] is one
leading example of this approach, and a case study on Jini, together with further
background information on this style of approach, can be found on the companion web
site for the book [www.cdk5.net/rmi]. Note, however, that Jini is a relatively primitive
example of a distributed event-based system that allows direct connectivity between
producers and consumers of events (hence compromising time and space uncoupling).
A number of more experimental approaches are also being investigated. For
example, some researchers are considering the added expressiveness of context [Frey


===== page 266 =====
248 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
and Roman 2007, Meier and Cahill 2010]. Context and context-awareness are major
concepts in mobile and ubiquitous computing. Context is defined in Chapter 19 as an
aspect of the physical circumstances of relevance to the system behaviour. One intuitive
example of context is location, and such systems have the potential for users to subscribe
to events associated with a given location – for example, any emergency messages
associated with the building where a user is located. Cilia et al. [2004] have also
introduced concept-based subscription models whereby filters are expressed in terms of
the semantics as well as the syntax of events. More specifically, data items have an
associated semantic context that captures the meaning of those items, allowing for
interpretation and possible translation into different data formats, thus addressing
heterogeneity.
For some classes of application, such as the financial trading system described in
Chapter 1, it is not enough for subscriptions to express queries over individual events.
Rather, there is a need for more complex systems that can recognize complex event
patterns. For example, Chapter 1 introduced the example of buying and selling shares
based on observing temporal sequences of events related to share prices, demonstrating
the need for complex event processing (or composite event detection, as it is sometimes
called). Complex event processing allows the specification of patterns of events as they
occur in the distributed environment – for example, ‘inform me if water levels rise by at
least 20% in the River Eden in at least three places and simulation models are also
reporting a risk of flooding’. A further example of an event pattern arose in Chapter 1,
concerned with detecting share price movements over a given time period. In general,
patterns can be logical, temporal or spatial. For further information on complex event
processing, refer to Muhl et al. [2006].
6.3.2 Implementation issues
From the description above, the task of a publish-subscribe system is clear: to ensure that
events are delivered efficiently to all subscribers that have filters defined that match the
event. Added to this, there may be additional requirements in terms of security,
scalability, failure handling, concurrency and quality of service. This makes the
implementation of publish-subscribe systems rather complex, and this has been an area
of intense investigation in the research community. We consider key implementation
issues below, examining centralized versus distributed implementations before moving
on to consider the overall system architecture required to implement publish-subscribe
systems (particularly distributed implementations of content-based approaches). We
conclude the section by summarizing the design space of publish-subscribe systems,
with associated pointers to the literature.
Centralized versus distributed implementations • A number of architectures for the
implementation of publish-subscribe systems have been identified. The simplest
approach is to centralize the implementation in a single node with a server on that node
acting as an event broker. Publishers then publish events (and optionally send
advertisements) to this broker, and subscribers send subscriptions to the broker and
receive notifications in return. Interaction with the broker is then through a series of
point-to-point messages; this can be implemented using message passing or remote
invocation.


===== page 267 =====
SECTION 6.3 PUBLISH-SUBSCRIBE SYSTEMS 249
Figure 6.9 A network of brokers
Publishers Subscribers
Broker network
P
1
S
1
P
2
S
2
P
3
S3
This approach is straightforward to implement, but the design lacks resilience and
scalability, since the centralized broker represents a single point for potential system
failure and a performance bottleneck. Consequently, distributed implementations of
publish-subscribe systems are also available. In such schemes, the centralized broker is
replaced by a network of brokers that cooperate to offer the desired functionality as
illustrated in Figure 6.9. Such approaches have the potential to survive node failure and
have been shown to be able to operatewell in Internet-scale deployments.
Taking this a step further, it is possible to have a fully peer-to-peer
implementation of a publish-subscribe system. This is a very popular implementation
strategy for recent systems. In this approach, there is no distinction between publishers,
subscribers and brokers; all nodes act as brokers, cooperatively implementing the
required event routing functionality (as discussed further below).
Overall systems architecture • As mentioned above, the implementation of centralized
schemes is relatively straightforward, with the central service maintaining a repository
of subscriptions and matching event notifications with this set of subscriptions.
Similarly, the implementations of channel-based or topic-based schemes are relatively
straightforward. For example, a distributed implementation can be achieved by mapping
channels or topics onto associated groups (as defined in Section 6.2) and then using the
underlying multicast communication facilities to deliver events to interested parties
(using reliable and ordered variants, as appropriate). The distributed implementation of
content-based (or by extrapolation, type-based) approaches is more complex and
deserving of further consideration. The range of architectural choices for such
approaches is captured in Figure 6.10 (adapted from Baldoni and Virgillito [2005]).
In the bottom layer, publish-subscribe systems make use of a range of interprocess
communication services, such as TCP/IP, IP multicast (where available) or more
specialized services, as offered for example by wireless networks. The heart of the


===== page 268 =====
250 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.10 The architecture of publish-subscribe systems
Publish-subscribe architecture
Matching
Informed
Event routing Flooding Filtering Rendezvous gossip
Broker Group
Overlay networks DHT Gossip
network multicast
Network protocols TCP/IP IP mcast 802.11g MAC bcast
architecture is provided by the event routing layer supported by a network overlay
infrastructure. Event routing performs the task of ensuring that event notifications are
routed as efficiently as possible to appropriate subscribers, whereas the overlay
infrastructure supports this by setting up appropriate networks of brokers or peer-to-peer
structures. For content-based approaches, this problem is referred to as content-based
routing (CBR), with the goal being to exploit content information to efficiently route
events to their required destination. The top layer implements matching – that is,
ensuring that events match a given subscription. While this can be implemented as a
discrete layer, often matching is pushed down into the event routing mechanisms, as will
become apparent shortly.
Within this overall architecture, there is a wide variety of implementation
approaches. We step through a select set of implementations to illustrate the general
principles behind content-based routing:
Flooding: The simplest approach is based on flooding, that is, sending an event
notification to all nodes in the network and then carrying out the appropriate
matching at the subsciber end. As an alternative, flooding can be used to send
subscriptions back to all possible publishers, with the matching carried out at the
publishing end and matched events sent directly to the relevant subscribers using
point-to-point communication. Flooding can be implemented using an underlying
broadcast or multicast facility. Alternatively, brokers can be arranged in an acyclic
graph in which each forwards incoming event notifications to all its neighbours
(effectively providing a multicast overlay, as discussed in Section 4.5.1). This
approach has the benefit of simplicity but can result in a lot of unnecessary network


===== page 269 =====
SECTION 6.3 PUBLISH-SUBSCRIBE SYSTEMS 251
Figure 6.11 Filtering-based routing
uponreceive publish(event e) from node x 1
matchlist := match(e, subscriptions) 2
send notify(e) to matchlist; 3
fwdlist := match(e, routing); 4
send publish(e) to fwdlist - x; 5
upon receive subscribe(subscription s) from node x 6
if x is client then 7
add x to subscriptions; 8
else add(x, s) to routing; 9
send subscribe(s) to neighbours - x; 10
traffic. Hence, the alternative schemes described below try to optimize the number of
messages exchanged through consideration of content.
Filtering: One principle that underpinsmany approaches is to apply filtering in the
network of brokers. This is referred to as filtering-based routing. Brokers forward
notifications through the network only where there is a path to a valid subscriber.
This is achieved by propagating subscription information through the network
towards potential publishers and then storing associated state at each broker. More
specifically, each node must maintain a neighbours list containing a list of all
connected neighbours in the network of brokers, a subscription list containing a list
of all directly connected subscribers serviced by this node, and a routing table.
Crucially, this routing table maintains a list of neighbours and valid subscriptions for
that pathway.
This approach also requires an implementationof matching on each node in the
network of brokers: in particular, a match function takes a given event notification
and a list of nodes together with associated subscriptions and returns a set of nodes
where the notification matches the subscription. The specific algorithm for this
filtering approach is captured in Figure 6.11 (taken from Baldoni and Virgillito
[2005]). When a broker receives a publish request from a given node, it must pass
this notification to all connected nodes where there is a corresponding matching
subscription and also decide where to propagate this event through the network of
brokers. Lines 2 and 3 achieve the first goal by matching the event against the
subscription list and then forwarding the event to all the nodes with matching
subscriptions (the matchlist). Lines 4 and 5 then use the match function again, this
time matching the event against the routing table and forwarding only to the paths
that lead to a subscription (the fwdlist). Brokers must also deal with incoming
subscription events. If the subscription event is from an immediately connected
subscriber, then this subscription must be entered in the subscriptions table (lines 7
and 8). Otherwise, the broker is an intermediary node; this node now knows that a
pathway exists towards this subscription and hence an appropriate entry is added to
the routing table (line 9). In both cases, this subscription event is then passed to all
neighbours apart from the originating node (line 10).


===== page 270 =====
252 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.12 Rendezvous-based routing
uponreceive publish(event e) from node x at node i
rvlist := EN(e);
if i in rvlist then begin
matchlist <- match(e, subscriptions);
send notify(e) to matchlist;
end
send publish(e) to rvlist - i;
upon receive subscribe(subscription s) from node x at node i
rvlist := SN(s);
if i in rvlist then
add s to subscriptions;
else
send subscribe(s) to rvlist - i;
Advertisements: The pure filtering-based approach described above can generate a
lot of traffic due to propagation of subscriptions, with subscriptions essentially using
a flooding approach back towards all possible publishers. In systems with
advertisements this burden can be reduced by propagating the advertisements
towards subscribers in a similar (actually, symmetrical) way to the propagation of
subscriptions. There are interesting trade-offs between the two approaches, and some
systems adopt both approaches in tandem [Carzaniga et al. 2001].
Rendezvous: Another approach to control the propagation of subscriptions (and to
achieve a natural load balancing) is the rendezvous approach. To understand this
approach, it is necessary to view the set of all possible events as an event space and
to partition responsibility for this event space between the set of brokers in the
network. In particular, this approach defines rendezvous nodes, which are broker
nodes responsible for a given subset of the event space. To achieve this, a given
rendezvous-based routing algorithm must define two functions. First, SN(s) takes a
given subscription, s, and returns one or more rendezvous nodes that take
responsibility for that subscription. Each such rendezvous node maintains a
subscription list as in the filtering approach above, and forwards all matching events
to the set of subscribing nodes. Second, when an event e is published, the function
EN(e) also returns one or more rendezvous nodes, this time responsible for matching
e against subscriptions in the system. Note that both SN(s) and EN(e) return more
than one node if reliability is a concern. Note also that this approach only works if
the intersection of EN(e) and SN(s) is non-empty for a given e that matches s (known
as the mapping intersection rule, as defined by Baldoni and Virgillito [2005]). The
corresponding code for rendezvous-based routing is shown in Figure 6.12 (again
taken from Baldoni and Virgillito [2005]). This time, we leave the interpretation of
the algorithm as an exercise for the reader (see Exercise 6.11).
One interesting interpretation of rendezvous-based routing is to map the event
space onto a distributed hash table (DHT). Distributed hash tables were introduced
briefly in Section 4.5.1 and are examined in more detail in Chapter 10. A distributed


===== page 271 =====
SECTION 6.3 PUBLISH-SUBSCRIBE SYSTEMS 253
Figure 6.13 Example publish-subscribe systems
System (and further reading) Subscription Distribution Event routing
model model
CORBA Event Service (Chapter 8) Channel-based Centralized -
TIB Rendezvouz [Oki et al. 1993] Topic-based Distributed Ffiltering
Scribe [Castro et al. 2002b] Topic-based Peer-to-peer Rendezvous
(DHT)
TERA [Baldoni et al. 2007] Topic-based Peer-to-peer Informed gossip
Siena [Carzaniga et al. 2001] Content-based Distributed Filtering
Gryphon [www.research.ibm.com] Content-based Distributed Filtering
Hermes [Pietzuch and Bacon 2002] Topic- and Distributed Rendezvous and
content-based filtering
MEDYM [Cao and Singh 2005] Content-based Distributed Flooding
Meghdoot [Gupta et al. 2004] Content-based Peer-to-peer Rendezvous
Structure-less CBR [Baldoni et al. 2005] Content-based Peer-to-peer Informed gossip
hash table is a style of network overlay that distributes a hash table over a set of nodes
in a peer-to-peer network. The key observation for rendezvous-based routing is that the
hash function can be used to map both events and subscriptions onto a corresponding
rendezvous node for the management of such subscriptions.
It is possible to employ other peer-to-peer middleware approaches to underpin
event routing in publish-subscribe systems. Indeed, this is a very active area of research
with many novel and interesting proposals emerging, particularly for very large-scale
systems [Carzaniga et al. 2001]. One specific approach is to adopt gossiping as a means
of supporting event routing. Gossip-based approaches are a popular mechanism for
achieving multicast (including reliable multicast), as discussed in Section 18.4.1. They
operate by nodes in the network periodically and probabilistically exchanging events (or
data) with neighbouring nodes. Through this approach, it is possible to propagate events
effectively through the network without the structure imposed by other approaches. A
pure gossip approach is effectively an alternative strategy for implementing flooding, as
described above. However, it is possible to take into account local information and, in
particular, content to achieve what is referred to as informed gossip. Such approaches
can be particularly attractive in highly dynamic environments where network or node
churn can be high [Baldoni et al. 2005].
6.3.3 Examples of publish-subscribe systems
We conclude this section by listing some major examples of publish-subscribe systems,
providing references for further reading (see Figure 6.13). This figure also captures the
design space for publish-subscribe systems, illustrating how different designs can result
from decisions on subscription and distribution models and, especially, the underlying
event routing strategy. Note that event routing is not required for centralized schemes,
hence the blank entry in the table.


===== page 272 =====
254 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
6.4 Message queues
Message queues (or more accurately, distributed message queues) are a further
important category of indirect communication systems. Whereas groups and publish-
subscribe provide a one-to-many style of communication, message queues provide a
point-to-point service using the concept of a message queue as an indirection, thus
achieving the desired properties of space and time uncoupling. They are point-to-point
in that the sender places the message into a queue, and it is then removed by a single
process. Message queues are also referred to as Message-Oriented Middleware. This is
a major class of commercial middleware with key implementations including IBM’s
WebSphere MQ, Microsoft’s MSMQ and Oracle’s Streams Advanced Queuing (AQ).
The main use of such products is to achieve Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) –
that is, integration between applications within a given enterprise – a goal that is
achieved by the inherent loose coupling of message queues. They are also extensively
used as the basis for commercial transaction processing systems because of their
intrinsic support for transactions, discussed further in Section 6.4.1.
We examine message queues in more detail below, considering the programming
model offered by message queueing systems before addressing implementation issues.
The section then concludes by presenting the Java Messaging Service (JMS) as an
example of a middleware specification supporting message queues (and also publish-
subscribe).
6.4.1 The programming model
The programming model offered by message queues is very simple. It offers an
approach to communication in distributed systems through queues. In particular,
producer processes can send messages to a specific queue and other (consumer)
processes can then receive messages from this queue. Three styles of receive are
generally supported:
(cid:129) ablocking receive, which will block until an appropriate message is available;
(cid:129) a non-blocking receive (a polling operation), which will check the status of the
queue and return a message if available, or a not available indication otherwise;
(cid:129) a notify operation, which will issue an event notification when a message is
available in the associated queue.
This overall approach is captured pictorially in Figure 6.14.
A number of processes can send messages to the same queue, and likewise a
number of receivers can remove messages from a queue. The queuing policy is normally
first-in-first-out (FIFO), but most message queue implementations also support the
concept of priority, with higher-priority messages delivered first. Consumer processes
can also select messages from the queue based on properties of a message. In more
detail, a message consists of a destination (that is, a unique identifier designating the
destination queue), metadata associated with the message, including fields such as the
priority of the message and the delivery mode, and also the body of the message. The
body is normally opaque and untouched by the message queue system. The associated


===== page 273 =====
SECTION 6.4 MESSAGE QUEUES 255
Figure 6.14 The message queue paradigm
Producers Message queue system Consumers
Receive
Send
Send
Poll
.
.
Send
Notify
Message
content is serialized using any of the standard approaches described in Section 4.3; that
is, marshalled data types, object serialization or XML structured messages. Message
sizes are configurable and can be very large – for example, on the order of a 100 Mbytes
Given the fact that message bodies are opaque, message selection is normally expressed
through predicates defined over the metadata.
Oracle’s AQ introduces an interesting twist on this basic idea to achieve better
integration with (relational) databases; in Oracle AQ, messages are rows in a database
table, and queues are database tables that can be queried using the full power of a
database query language.
One crucial property of message queue systems is that messages are persistent –
that is, message queues will store the messages indefinitely (until they are consumed)
and will also commit the messages to disk to enable reliable delivery. In particular,
following the definition of reliable communication in Section 2.4.2, any message sent is
eventually received (validity) and the message received is identical to the one sent, and
no messages are delivered twice (integrity). Message queue systems therefore guarantee
that messages will be delivered (and delivered once) but cannot say anything about the
timing of the delivery.
Message passing systems can also support additional functionality:
(cid:129) Most commercially available systems provide support for the sending or receiving
of a message to be contained within a transaction. The goal is to ensure that all the
steps in the transaction are completed, or the transaction has no effect at all (the
‘all or nothing’ property). This relies on interfacing with an external transaction
service, provided by the middleware environment. Detailed consideration of
transactions is deferred until Chapter 16.
(cid:129) Anumber of systems also support message transformation, whereby an arbitrary
transformation can be performed on an arriving message. The most common
application of this concept is to transform messages between formats to deal with
heterogeneity in underlying data representations. This could be as simple as


===== page 274 =====
256 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
transforming from one byte order to another (big-endian to little-endian) or more
complex, involving for example a transformation from one external data
representation to another (such as SOAP to IIOP). Some systems also allow
programmers to develop their own application-specific transformation in response
to triggers from the underlying message queuing system. Message transformation
is an important tool in dealing with heterogeneity generally and achieving
Enterprise Application Integration in particular (as discussed above). Note that the
term message broker is often used to denote a service responsible for message
transformation.
(cid:129) Some message queue implementations also provide support for security. For
example, WebSphere MQ provides support for the confidential transmission of
data using the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) together with support for
authentication and access control. See Chapter 11.
As a final word on the programming abstraction offered by message queues, it is helpful
to compare the style of programming with other communication paradigms. Message
queues are similar in many ways to the message-passing systems considered in Chapter
4. The difference is that whereas message-passing systems have implicit queues
associated with senders and receivers (for example, the message buffers in MPI),
message queuing systems have explicit queues that are third-party entities, separate
from the sender and the receiver. It is this key difference that makes message queues an
indirect communication paradigm with the crucial properties of space and time
uncoupling.
6.4.2 Implementation issues
The key implementation issue for message queuing systems is the choice between
centralized and distributed implementations of the concept. Some implementations are
centralized, with one or more message queues managed by a queue manager located at
a given node. The advantage of this scheme is simplicity, but such managers can become
rather heavyweight components and have the potential to become a bottleneck or a
single point of failure. As a result, more distributed implementations have been
proposed. To illustrate distributed architectures, we briefly consider the approach
adopted in WebSphere MQ as representative of the state-of-the-art in this area.
Case study: WebSphere MQ • WebSphere MQ is middleware developed by IBM based
on the concept of message queues, offering an indirection between senders and receivers
of messages [www.redbooks.ibm.com]. Queues in WebSphere MQ are managed by
queue managers which host and manage queues and allow applications to access queues
through the Message Queue Interface (MQI). The MQI is a relatively simple interface
allowing applications to carry out operations such as connecting to or disconnecting
from a queue (MQCONN and MQDISC) or sending/receiving messages to/from a queue
(MQPUT and MQGET). Multiple queue managers can reside on a single physical server.
Client applications accessing a queue manager may reside on the same physical
server. More generally, though, they will be on different machines and must then
communicate with the queue manager through what is known as a client channel. Client
channels adopt the rather familiar concept of a proxy, as introduced in Chapters 2 and 5,


===== page 275 =====
SECTION 6.4 MESSAGE QUEUES 257
Figure 6.15 A simple networked topology in WebSphere MQ
Queue manager
Client
T
Proxy
Stub Services
Client channel
whereby MQI commands are issued on the proxy and then sent transparently to the
queue manager for execution using RPC. An example of such a configuration is shown
inFigure 6.15. In this configuration, a client application is sending messages to a remote
queue manager and multiple services (on the same machine as the server) are then
consuming the incoming messages.
This is a very simple use of WebSphere MQ, and in practice it is more common
for queue managers to be linked together into a federated structure, mirroring the
approach often adopted in publish-subscribe systems (with networks of brokers). To
achieve this, MQ introduces the concept of a message channel as a unidirectional
connection between two queue managers that is used to forward messages
asynchronously from one queue to another. Note the terminology here: a message
channel is a connection between two queue managers, whereas a client channel is a
connection between a client application and a queue manager. A message channel is
managed by a message channel agent (MCA) at each end. The two agents are
responsible for establishing and maintaining the channel, including an initial negotiation
to agree on the properties of the channel (including security properties). Routing tables
are also included in each queue manager, and together with channels this allows
arbitrary topologies to be created.
This ability to create customized topologies is crucial to WebSphere MQ,
allowing users to determine the right topology for their application domain, for example
to deliver certain requirements in terms of scalability and performance. Tools are
provided for systems administrators to create suitable topologies and to hide the
complexities of establishing message channels and routing strategies.
A wide range of topologies can be created,including trees, meshes or a bus-based
configuration. To illustrate the concept of topologies further, we present one example
topology often used in WebSphere MQ deployments, the hub-and-spoke topology.


===== page 276 =====
258 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
The hub-and-spoke approach: In the hub-and-spoke topology, one queue manager is
designated as the hub. The hub hosts a range of services. Client applications do not
connect directly to this hub but rather connect through queue managers designated as
spokes. Spokes relay messages to the message queue of the hub for processing by the
various services. Spokes are placed strategically around the network to support different
clients. The hub is placed somewhere appropriate in the network, on a node with
sufficient resources to deal with the volume of traffic. Most applications and services are
located on the hub, although it is also possible to have some more local services on
spokes.
This topology is heavily used with WebSphere MQ, particularly in large-scale
deployments covering significant geographical areas (and possibly crossing
organizational boundaries). The key to the approach is to be able to connect to a local
spoke over a high-bandwidth connection, for example over a local area network (spokes
may even be placed in the same physical machine as client applications to minimize
latency).
Recall that communication between a client application and a queue manager uses
RPC, whereas internal communication between queue managers is asynchronous (non-
blocking). This means that the client application is only blocked until the message is
deposited in the local queue manager (the local spoke); subsequent delivery, potentially
over wide area networks, is asynchronous but guaranteed to be reliable by the
WebSphere MQ middleware.
Clearly, the drawback of this architecture is that the hub can be a potential
bottleneck and a single point of failure. WebSphere MQ also supports other facilities to
overcome these problems, including queue manager clusters, which allow multiple
instances of the same service to be supported by multiple queue managers with implicit
load balancing across the different instantiations [www.redbooks.ibm.com].
6.4.3 Case study: The Java Messaging Service (JMS)
The Java Messaging Service (JMS) [java.sun.com XI] is a specification of a
standardized way for distributed Java programs to communicate indirectly. Most
notably, as will be explained, the specification unifies the publish-subscribe and
message queue paradigms at least superficially by supporting topics and queues as
alternative destinations of messages. A wide variety of implementations of the common
specification are now available, including Joram from OW2, Java Messaging from
JBoss, Sun’s Open MQ, Apache ActiveMQ and OpenJMS. Other platforms, including
WebSphere MQ, also provide a JMS interface on to their underlying infrastructure.
JMS distinguishes between the following key roles:
(cid:129) A JMS client is a Java program or component that produces or consumes
messages, a JMS producer is a program that creates and produces messages and a
JMS consumer is a program that receives and consumes messages.
(cid:129) A JMS provider is any of the multiple systems that implement the JMS
specification.
(cid:129) A JMS message is an object that is used to communicate information between
JMS clients (from producers to consumers).


===== page 277 =====
SECTION 6.4 MESSAGE QUEUES 259
Figure 6.16 The programming model offered by JMS
Connection factory
Connection
Message Message
Session
producer consumer
Sends to Receives from
Destin:ation Message Destin:ation
Topic Topic
Queue Queue
Creates Communicates
(cid:129) A JMS destination is an object supporting indirect communication in JMS. It is
either a JMS topic or a JMS queue.
Programming with JMS • The programming model offered by the JMS API is captured
in Figure 6.16. To interact with a JMS provider, it is first necessary to create a
connection between a client program and the provider. This is created through a
connection factory (a service responsible for creating connections with the required
properties). The resultant connection is a logical channel between the client and
provider; the underlying implementation may, for example, map onto a TCP/IP socket
if implemented over the Internet. Note that two types of connection can be established,
aTopicConnection or a QueueConnection, thus enforcing a clear separation between the
two modes of operation within given connections.
Connections can be used to create one or more sessions – a session is a series of
operations involving the creation, production and consumption of messages related to a
logical task. The resultant session object also supports operations to create transactions,
supporting all-or-nothing execution of a series of operations, as discussed in Section
6.4.1. There is a clear distinction between topic sessions and queue sessions in that a
TopicConnection can support one or more topic sessions and a QueueConnection can
support one or more queue sessions, but it is not possible to mix session styles in a
connection. Thus, the two styles of operation are integrated in a rather superficial way.
The session object is central to the operation of JMS, supporting methods for the
creation of messages, message producers and message consumers:
(cid:129) In JMS, a message consists of three parts: a header, a set of properties and the
body of the message. The header contains all the information needed to identify
and route the message, including the destination (a reference to either a topic or a


===== page 278 =====
260 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.17 Java class FireAlarmJMS
import javax.jms.*;
import javax.naming.*;
public class FireAlarmJMS {
public void raise() {
try { 1
Context ctx = new InitialContext(); 2
TopicConnectionFactory topicFactory = 3
(TopicConnectionFactory)ctx.lookup("TopicConnectionFactory"); 4
Topic topic = (Topic)ctx.lookup("Alarms"); 5
TopicConnection topicConn = 6
topicConnectionFactory.createTopicConnection(); 7
TopicSession topicSess = topicConn.createTopicSession(false, 8
Session.AUTO_ACKNOWLEDGE); 9
TopicPublisher topicPub = topicSess.createPublisher(topic); 10
TextMessage msg = topicSess.createTextMessage(); 11
msg.setText("Fire!"); 12
topicPub.publish(message); 13
} catch (Exception e) { 14
} 15
}
queue), the priority of the message, the expiration date, a message ID and a
timestamp. Most of these fields are created by the underlying system, but some
can be filled in specifically through the associated constructor methods. Properties
are all user-defined and can be used to associate other application-specific
metadata elements with a message. For example, if implementing a context-aware
system (as discussed in Chapter 19), the properties can be used to express
additional context associated with the message, including a location field. As in
the general description of message queue systems, this body is opaque and
untouched by the system. In JMS, the body can be any one of a text message, a
byte stream, a serialized Java object, a stream of primitive Java values or a more
structured set of name/value pairs.
(cid:129) Amessage producer is an object used to publish messages under a particular topic
or to send messages to a queue.
(cid:129) Amessage consumer is an object used to subscribe to messages concerned with a
given topic or to receive messages from a queue. The consumer is more
complicated than the producer, for two reasons. First, it is possible to associate
filters with message consumers by specifying what is known as a message selector
– a predicate defined over the values in the header and properties parts of a
message (not the body). A subset of the database query language SQL is used to
specify properties. This could be used, for example, to filter messages from a


===== page 279 =====
SECTION 6.4 MESSAGE QUEUES 261
Figure 6.18 Java class FireAlarmConsumerJMS
import javax.jms.*;
import javax.naming.*;
public class FireAlarmConsumerJMS {
public String await() {
try { 1
Context ctx = new InitialContext(); 2
TopicConnectionFactory topicFactory = 3
(TopicConnectionFactory)ctx.lookup("TopicConnectionFactory"); 4
Topic topic = (Topic)ctx.lookup("Alarms"); 5
TopicConnection topicConn = 6
topicConnectionFactory.createTopicConnection(); 7
TopicSession topicSess = topicConn.createTopicSession(false, 8
Session.AUTO_ACKNOWLEDGE); 9
TopicSubscriber topicSub = topicSess.createSubscriber(topic); 10
topicSub.start(); 11
TextMessage msg = (TextMessage) topicSub.receive(); 12
return msg.getText(); 13
} catch (Exception e) { 14
return null; 15
} 16
}
given location in the context-aware example above. Second, there are two modes
provided for receiving messages: the program either can block using a receive
operation or it can establish a message listener object which must provide an
onMessage method that is invoked whenever a suitable message is identified.
A simple example • To illustrate the use of JMS, we return to our example of Section
6.2.3, the fire alarm service, and show how this would be implemented in JMS. We
choose the topic-based publish-subscribe service as this is intrinsically a one-to-many
application, with the alarm producing alarm messages targeted towards many consumer
applications.
The code for the fire alarm object is shown in Figure 6.17. It is more complicated
than the equivalent JGroups example mainly because of the need to create a connection,
session, publisher and message, as shown in lines 6–11. This is relatively
straightforward apart from the parameters of createTopicSession, which are whether the
session should be transactional (false in this case) and the mode of acknowledging
messages (AUTO_ACKNOWLEDGE in this example, which means a session
automatically acknowledges the receipt of a message). There is additional complexity
associated with finding the connection factory and topic in the distributed environment
(the complexity of connecting to a named channel in JGroups is all hidden in the connect
method). This is achieved using JNDI (the Java Naming and Directory Interface) in lines
2 to 5. This is included for completeness and it is assumed that readers can appreciate


===== page 280 =====
262 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
the purpose of these lines of code without further explanation. Lines 12 and 13 contain
the crucial code to create a new message and then publish it to the appropriate topic. The
code to create a new instance of the FireAlarmJMS class and then raise an alarm is:
FireAlarmJMS alarm = new FireAlarmJMS();
alarm.raise();
The corresponding code for the receiver end is very similar and is shown in Figure 6.18.
Lines 2–9 are identical and create the required connection and session, respectively.
This time, though, an object of type TopicSubscriber is created next (line 10), and the
start method in line 11 starts this subscription, enabling messages to be received. The
blocking receive in line 12 then awaits an incoming message and line 13 returns the
textual contents of this message as a string. This class is used as follows by a consumer:
FireAlarmConsumerJMS alarmCall = new FireAlarmConsumerJMS();
String msg = alarmCall.await();
System.out.println("Alarm received: "+msg);
Overall this case study has illustrated how both publish-subscribe and message queues
can be supported by a single middleware solution (in this case JMS), offering the
programmer the choice of one-to-many or point-to-point variants of indirect
communication, respectively.
6.5 Shared memory approaches
In this section, we examine indirect communication paradigms that offer an abstraction
of shared memory. We look briefly at distributed shared memory techniques that were
developed principally for parallel computing before moving on to tuple space
communication, an approach that allows programmers to read and write tuples from a
shared tuple space. Whereas distributed shared memory operates at the level of reading
and writing bytes, tuple spaces offer a higher-level perspective in the form of semi-
structured data. In addition, whereas distributed shared memory is accessed by address,
tuple spaces are associative, offering a form of content-addressable memory [Gelernter
1985].
Chapter 18 of the fourth edition of this book provided in-depth coverage of
distributed shared memory, including consistency models and several case studies. This
chapter can be found on the companion web site for the book [www.cdk5.net/dsm].
6.5.1 Distributed shared memory
Distributed shared memory (DSM) is an abstraction used for sharing data between
computers that do not share physical memory. Processes access DSM by reads and
updates to what appears to be ordinary memory within their address space. However, an
underlying runtime system ensures transparently that processes executing at different
computers observe the updates made by one another. It is as though the processes access
a single shared memory, but in fact the physical memory is distributed (see Figure 6.19).


===== page 281 =====
SECTION 6.5 SHARED MEMORY APPROACHES 263
Figure 6.19 The distributed shared memory abstraction
Distributed shared memory
DSM appears as
Process
memory in address
accessing DSM
Mappings space of process
Physical Physical Physical
memory memory memory
The main point of DSM is that it spares the programmer the concerns of message
passing when writing applications that might otherwise have to use it. DSM is primarily
a tool for parallel applications or for any distributed application or group of applications
in which individual shared data items can be accessed directly. DSM is in general less
appropriate in client-server systems, where clients normally view server-held resources
as abstract data and access them by request (for reasons of modularity and protection).
Message passing cannot be avoided altogether in a distributed system: in the
absenceof physically shared memory, the DSM runtime support has to send updates in
messages between computers. DSM systems manage replicated data: each computer has
a local copy of recently accessed data items stored in DSM, for speed of access. The
problems of implementing DSM are related to the replication issues to be discussed in
Chapter 18, as well as to those of caching shared files, discussed in Chapter 12.
One of the first notable examples of a DSM implementation was the Apollo
Domain file system [Leach et al. 1983], in which processes hosted by different
workstations share files by mapping them simultaneously into their address spaces. This
example shows that distributed shared memory can be persistent. That is, it may outlast
the execution of any process or group of processes that accesses it and be shared by
different groups of processes over time.
The significance of DSM first grew alongside the development of shared-memory
multiprocessors (discussed further in Section 7.3). Much research has gone into
investigating algorithms suitable for parallel computation on these multiprocessors. At
the hardware architectural level, developments include both caching strategies and fast
processor-memory interconnections, aimed at maximizing the number of processors
that can be sustained while achieving fast memory access latency and throughput
[Dubois et al. 1988]. Where processes are connected to memory modules over a
common bus, the practical limit is on the order of 10 processors before performance
degrades drastically due to bus contention. Processors sharing memory are commonly
constructed in groups of four, sharing a memory module over a bus on a single circuit
board. Multiprocessors with up to 64 processors in total are constructed from such
boards in a Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) architecture. This is a hierarchical


===== page 282 =====
264 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
architecture in which the four-processor boards are connected using a high-performance
switch or higher-level bus. In a NUMA architecture, processors see a single address
space containing all the memory of all the boards. But the access latency for on-board
memory is less than that for a memory module on a different board – hence the name of
this architecture.
In distributed-memory multiprocessors and clusters of off-the-shelf computing
components (again, see Section 7.3), the processors do not share memory but are
connected by a very high speed network. These systems, like general-purpose
distributed systems, can scale to much greater numbers of processors than a shared-
memory multiprocessor’s 64 or so. A central question that has been pursued by the DSM
and multiprocessor research communities is whether the investment in knowledge of
shared memory algorithms and the associated software can be directly transferred to a
more scalable distributed memory architecture.
MessagepassingversusDSM • As a communication mechanism, DSM is comparable
with message passing rather than with request-reply-based communication, since its
application to parallel processing, in particular, entails the use of asynchronous
communication. The DSM and message-passing approaches to programming can be
contrasted as follows:
Service offered: Under the message-passing model, variables have to be marshalled
from one process, transmitted and unmarshalled into other variables at the receiving
process. By contrast, with shared memory the processes involved share variables
directly, so no marshalling is necessary – even of pointers to shared variables – and
thus no separate communication operations are necessary. Most implementations
allow variables stored in DSM to be named and accessed similarly to ordinary
unshared variables. In favour of message passing, on the other hand, is that it allows
processes to communicate while being protected from one another by having private
address spaces, whereas processes sharing DSM can, for example, cause one another
to fail by erroneously altering data. Furthermore, when message passing is used
between heterogeneous computers, marshalling takes care of differences in data
representation; but how can memory be shared between computers with, for example,
different integer representations?
Synchronization between processes is achieved in the message model through
message passing primitives themselves, using techniques such as the lock server
implementation discussed in Chapter 16. In the case of DSM, synchronization is via
normal constructs for shared-memory programming such as locks and semaphores
(although these require different implementations in the distributed memory
environment). Chapter 7 briefly discusses such synchronization objects in the context
of programming with threads.
Finally, since DSM can be made persistent, processes communicating via DSM
may execute with non-overlapping lifetimes. A process can leave data in an agreed
memory location for the other to examine when it runs. By contrast, processes
communicating via message passing must execute at the same time.
Efficiency: Experiments show that certain parallel programs developed for DSM can
be made to perform about as well as functionally equivalent programs written for
message-passing platforms on the same hardware [Carter et al. 1991] – at least in the


===== page 283 =====
SECTION 6.5 SHARED MEMORY APPROACHES 265
case of relatively small numbers of computers (10 or so). However, this result cannot
be generalized. The performance of a program based on DSM depends upon many
factors, as we shall discuss below – particularly the pattern of data sharing (such as
whether an item is updated by several processes).
There is a difference in the visibility of costs associated with the two types of
programming. In message passing, all remote data accesses are explicit and therefore
the programmer is always aware of whether a particular operation is in-process or
involves the expense of communication. Using DSM, however, any particular read
or update may or may not involve communication by the underlying runtime support.
Whether it does or not depends upon such factors as whether the data have been
accessed before and the sharing pattern between processes at different computers.
There is no definitive answer as to whether DSM is preferable to message passing for
any particular application. DSM remains a tool whose ultimate status depends upon the
efficiency with which it can be implemented.
6.5.2 Tuple space communication
Tuple spaces were first introduced by David Gelernter from Yale University as a novel
form of distributed computing based on what he refers to as generative communication
[Gelernter 1985]. In this approach, processes communicate indirectly by placing tuples
in a tuple space, from which other processes can read or remove them. Tuples do not
have an address but are accessed by pattern matching on content (content-addressable
memory, as discussed by Gelernter [1985]). The resultant Linda programming model
has been highly influential and has led to significant developments in distributed
programming including systems such as Agora [Bisiani and Forin 1988] and, more
significantly, JavaSpaces from Sun (discussed below) and IBM’s TSpaces. Tuple space
communication has also been influential in the field of ubiquitous computing, for
reasons that are explored in depth in Chapter 19.
This section provides an examination of the tuple space paradigm as it applies to
distributed computing. We start by examining the programming model offered by tuple
spaces before briefly considering the associated implementation issues. The section then
concludes by examining the JavaSpaces specification as a case study, illustrating how
tuple spaces have evolved to embrace the object-oriented world.
The programming model • In the tuple space programming model, processes
communicate through a tuple space – a shared collection of tuples. Tuples in turn consist
of a sequence of one or more typed data fields such as <"fred", 1958>,<"sid", 1964>
and <4, 9.8, "Yes">. Any combination of types of tuples may exist in the same tuple
space. Processes share data by accessing the same tuple space: they place tuples in tuple
space using the write operation and read or extract them from tuple space using the read
ortake operation. The write operation adds a tuple without affecting existing tuples in
the space. The read operation returns the value of one tuple without affecting the
contents of the tuple space. The take operation also returns a tuple, but in this case it also
removes the tuple from the tuple space.
When reading or removing a tuple from tuple space, a process provides a tuple
specification and the tuple space returns any tuple that matches that specification – as
mentioned above, this is a type of associative addressing. To enable processes to


===== page 284 =====
266 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.20 The tuple space abstraction
take(<String, "Scotland", String>) write(<"Population", "Wales", 2900000>)
<"Capital", "Scotland", "Edinburgh">
<"Capital", "Wales", "Cardiff">
<"Capital", "N. Ireland", "Belfast">
<"Capital", "England", "London">
<"Population", "Scotland", 5168000>
<"Population", "UK", 61000000>
read(<"Population", String, Integer>) take(<String, "Scotland", Integer>)
synchronize their activities, the read and take operations both block until there is a
matching tuple in the tuple space. A tuple specification includes the number of fields and
the required values or types of the fields. For example, take(<String, integer>) could
extract either <"fred",1958> or <"sid",1964>;take(<String,1958>) would extract only
<"fred",1958> of those two.
In the tuple space paradigm, no direct access to tuples in tuple space is allowed
and processes have to replace tuples in the tuple space instead of modifying them. Thus,
tuples are immutable. Suppose, for example, that a set of processes maintains a shared
counter in tuple space. The current count (say, 64) is in the tuple <"counter", 64>. A
process must execute code of the following form in order to increment the counter in a
tuple space myTS:
<s, count> := myTS.take(<"counter", integer>);
myTS.write(<"counter", count+1>);
A further illustration of the tuple space paradigm is given in Figure 6.20. This tuple
space contains a range of tuples representing geographical information about countries
in the United Kingdom, including populations and capital cities. The take operation
take(<String, "Scotland", String>) will match <"Capital", "Scotland", "Edinburgh">,
whereas take(<String, "Scotland", Integer>) will match <"Population", "Scotland",
5168000>. The write operation write(<"Population", "Wales, 2900000>) will insert a
new tuple in the tuple space with information on the population of Wales. Finally,
read(<"Population", String, Integer) can match the equivalent tuples for the
populations of the UK, Scotland or indeed Wales, if this operation is executed after the
corresponding write operation. One will be selected nondeterministically by the tuple


===== page 285 =====
SECTION 6.5 SHARED MEMORY APPROACHES 267
space implementation and, with this being a read operation, the tuple will remain in the
tuple space.
Note that write, read and take are known as out, rd and in in Linda; we use the
more descriptive former names throughout this book. This terminology is also used in
JavaSpaces, discussed in a case study below.
Properties associated with tuple spaces: Gelernter [1985] presents some interesting
properties associated with tuple space communication, highlighting in particular both
space and time uncoupling as discussed in Section 6.1:
Space uncoupling: A tuple placed in tuple space may originate from any number of
sender processes and may be delivered to any one of a number of potential recipients.
This property is also referred to as distributed naming in Linda.
Time uncoupling: A tuple placed in tuple space will remain in that tuple space until
removed (potentially indefinitely), and hence the sender and receiver do not need to
overlap in time.
Together, these features provide an approach that is fully distributed in space and time
and also provide for a form of distributed sharing of shared variables via the tuple space.
Gelernter [1985] also explores a range of other properties associated with the
rather flexible style of naming employed in Linda (referred to as free naming). The
interested reader is directed to Gelernter’s paper for more information on this topic.
Variations on a theme: Since the introduction of Linda, refinements have been proposed
to the original model:
(cid:129) The original Linda model proposed a single, global tuple space. This is not
optimal in large systems, as it leads to the danger of unintended aliasing of tuples:
as the number of tuples in a tuple space increases, there is an increasing chance of
a read or take matching a tuple by accident. This is particularly likely when
matching on types, such as with take(<String, integer>), as mentioned above.
Given this, a number of systems have proposed multiple tuple spaces, including
the ability to dynamically create tuple spaces, introducing a degree of scoping into
the system (see, for example, the JavaSpaces case study below).
(cid:129) Linda was anticipated to be implemented as a centralized entity but later systems
have experimented with distributed implementations of tuple spaces (including
strategies to provide more fault tolerance). Given the importance of this topic to
this book, we focus on this in the implementation issues subsection below.
(cid:129) Researchers have also experimented with modifying or extending the operations
provided in tuple spaces and adapting the underlying semantics. One rather
interesting proposal is to unify the concepts of tuples and tuple spaces by
modelling everything as (unordered) sets – that is, tuple spaces are sets of tuples
and tuples are sets of values, which may now also include tuples. This variant is
known as Bauhaus Linda [Carriero et al. 1995].
(cid:129) Perhaps most interestingly, recent implementations of tuple spaces have moved
from tuples of typed data items to data objects (with attributes), turning the tuple
space into an object space. This proposal is adopted, for example, in the influential
system JavaSpaces, discussed in more detail below.


===== page 286 =====
268 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Implementation issues • Many of the implementations of tuple spaces adopt a
centralized solution where the tuple space resource is managed by a single server. This
has advantages in terms of simplicity, but such solutions are clearly not fault tolerant and
also will not scale. Because of this, distributed solutions have been proposed.
Replication: Several systems have proposed the use of replication to overcome the
problems identified above [Bakken and Schlichting 1995, Bessani et al. 2008, Xu and
Liskov 1989].
The proposals from Bakken and Schlichting [1995] and Bessani et al. [2008]
adopt a similar approach to replication, referred to as the state machine approach and
discussed further in Chapter 18. This approach assumes that a tuple space behaves like
a state machine, maintaining state and changing this state in response to events received
from other replicas or from the environment. To ensure consistency the replicas (i) must
start in the same state (an empty tuple space), (ii) must execute events in the same order
and (iii) must react deterministically to each event. The key second property can be
guaranteed by adopting a totally ordered multicast algorithm, as discussed in Section
6.2.2.
Xu and Liskov [1989] adopt a different approach, which optimizes the replication
strategy by using the semantics of the particular tuple space operations. In this proposal,
updates are carried out in the context of the current view (the agreed set of replicas) and
tuples are also partitioned into distinct tuple sets based on their associated logical names
(designated as the first field in the tuple). The system consists of a set of workers
carrying out computations on the tuple space, and a set of tuple space replicas. A given
physical node can contain any number of workers, replicas or indeed both; a given
worker therefore may or may not have a local replica. Nodes are connected by a
communications network that may lose, duplicate or delay messages and can deliver
messages out of order. Network partitions can also occur.
A write operation is implemented by sending a multicast message over the
unreliable communications channel to all members of the view. On receipt, members
place this tuple into their replica and acknowledge receipt. The write request is repeated
until all acknowledgements are received. For the correct operation of the protocol,
replicas must detect and acknowledge duplicate requests, but not carry out the
associated write operations.
Theread operation consists of sending a multicast message to all replicas. Each
replica seeks a match and returns this match to the requesting site. The first tuple
returned is delivered as the result of the read. This may come from a local node, but
given that many workers will not have a local replica, this is not guaranteed.
Thetake operation is more complex because of the need to agree on the tuple to
be selected and to remove this agreed tuple from all copies. The algorithm proceeds in
two phases. In phase 1, the tuple specification is sent to all replicas, and the replica
attempts to acquired the lock on the associated tuple set to serialize take requests on the
replicas (write and read operations are unaffected by the lock); if the lock cannot be
acquired, the take request is refused. Each replica that succeeds in obtaining the lock
responds with the set of matching tuples. This step is repeated until all replicas have
accepted the request and responded. The initiating process can then select one tuple from
the intersection of all the replies and return this as the result of the take request. If it is


===== page 287 =====
SECTION 6.5 SHARED MEMORY APPROACHES 269
Figure 6.21 Replication and the tuple space operations [Xu and Liskov 1989]
write 1. The requesting site multicasts the write request to all members of the view;
2. On receiving this request, members insert the tuple into their replica and acknowledge this action;
3. Step 1 is repeated until all acknowledgements are received.
read 1. The requesting site multicasts the read request to all members of the view;
2. On receiving this request, a member returns a matching tuple to the requestor;
3. The requestor returns the first matching tuple received as the result of the operation (ignoring others);
4. Step 1 is repeated until at least one response is received.
take Phase 1: Selecting the tuple to be removed
1. The requesting site multicasts the take request to all members of the view;
2. On receiving this request, each replica acquires a lock on the associated tuple set and, if the lock
cannot be acquired, the take request is rejected;
3. All accepting members reply with the set of all matching tuples;
4. Step 1 is repeated until all sites have accepted the request and responded with their set of tuples and
the intersection is non-null;
5. A particular tuple is selected as the result of the operation (selected randomly from the intersection
of all the replies);
6. If only a minority accept the request, this minority are asked to release their locks and phase 1 repeats.
Phase 2: Removing the selected tuple
1. The requesting site multicasts a remove request to all members of the view citing the tuple to be
removed;
2. On receiving this request, members remove the tuple from their replica, send an acknowledgement
and release the lock;
3. Step 1 is repeated until all acknowledgements are received.
not possible to obtain a majority of locks, the replicas are asked to release their locks and
phase 1 repeats.
In phase 2, this tuple must be removed from all replicas. This is achieved by
repeated multicasts to the replicas in the view until all have acknowledged deletion. As
withwrite requests, it is necessary for replicas to detect repeat requests in phase 2 and
to simply send another acknowledgement without carrying out another deletion
(otherwise multiple tuples could erroneously be deleted at this stage).
The steps involved for each operation are summarized in Figure 6.21. Note that a
separate algorithm is required to manage view changes if node failures occur or the
network partitions (see Xu and Liskov [1989] for details).
This algorithm is designed to minimize delay given the semantics of the three
tuple space operations:
readoperations only block until the first replica responds to the request.
take operations block until the end of phase 1, when the tuple to be deleted has been
agreed.
write operations can return immediately.


===== page 288 =====
270 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.22 Partitioning in the York Linda Kernel
User process User process User process
Local tuple Local tuple Local tuple
space manager space manager space manager
TSS TSS TSS TSS TSS
Local tuple Local tuple Local tuple
space manager space manager space manager
User process User process User process
This, though, introduces unacceptable levels of concurrency. For example, a read
operation may access a tuple that should have been deleted in the second phase of a take
operation. Therefore additional levels of concurrency control are required. In particular,
Xu and Liskov [1989] introduce the following additional constraints:
(cid:129) The operations of each worker must be executed at each replica in the same order
as they were issued by the worker;.
(cid:129) A write operation must not be executed at any replica until all previous take
operations issued by the same worker have completed at all replicas in the
worker's view.
A further example of using replication is provided in Chapter 19, where we present the
L2imbo approach, which uses replication to provide high availability in mobile
environments [Davies et al. 1998].
Other approaches: A range of other approaches have been employed in the
implementation of the tuple space abstraction, including partitioning of the tuple space
over a number of nodes and mapping onto peer-to-peer overlays:
(cid:129) The Linda Kernel developed at the University of York [Rowstron and Wood
1996] adopts an approach in which tuples are partitioned across a range of
available tuple space servers (TSSs), as illustrated in Figure 6.22. There is no
replication of tuples; that is, there is only one copy of each tuple. The motivation
is to increase performance of the tuple space, especially for highly parallel
computation.When a tuple is placed in tuple space, a hashing algorithm is used to
select one of the tuple space servers to be used. The implementation of read or
take is slightly more complex, as a tuple specification is provided that may specify
types or values of the associated fields. The hashing algorithm uses this


===== page 289 =====
SECTION 6.5 SHARED MEMORY APPROACHES 271
Figure 6.23 The JavaSpaces API
Operation Effect
Lease write(Entry e, Transaction txn, long lease) Places an entry into a particular
JavaSpace
Entry read(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long timeout) Returns a copy of an entry matching
a specified template
Entry readIfExists(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long timeout) As above, but not blocking
Entry take(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long timeout) Retrieves (and removes) an entry
matching a specified template
Entry takeIfExists(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long timeout) As above, but not blocking
EventRegistration notify(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, Notifies a process if a tuple matching
RemoteEventListener listen, long lease, (cid:3) a specified template is written to a
MarshalledObject handback) JavaSpace
specification to generate a set of possible servers that may contain matching
tuples, and a linear search must then be employed until a matching tuple is
discovered. Note that because there is only a single copy of a given tuple, the
implementation of take is greatly simplified.
(cid:129) Some implementations of tuple spaces have adopted peer-to-peer approaches in
which all nodes cooperate to provide the tuple space service. This approach is
particularly attractive given the intrinsic availability and scalability of peer-to-peer
solutions. Examples of peer-to-peer implementations include PeerSpaces [Busi et
al. 2003], which is developed using the JXTA peer-to-peer middleware
[jxta.dev.java.net], LIME and TOTA (the latter two systems feature in Chapter 19).
Case study: JavaSpaces • JavaSpaces is a tool for tuple space communication
developed by Sun [java.sun.com X, [java.sun.com VI]. More specifically, Sun provides
the specification of a JavaSpaces service, and third-party developers are then free to
offer implementations of JavaSpaces (significant implementations include GigaSpaces
[www.gigaspaces.com] and Blitz [www.dancres.org]). The tool is strongly dependent
on Jini (Sun’s discovery service, discussed further in Section 19.2.1), as will become
apparent below. The Jini Technology Starter Kit also includes an implementation of
JavaSpaces, referred to as Outrigger.
The goals of the JavaSpaces technology are:
(cid:129) to offer a platform that simplifies the design of distributed applications and
services;
(cid:129) tobe simple and minimal in terms of the number and size of associated classes and
to have a small footprint to allow the code to run on resource-limited devices (such
as smart phones);
(cid:129) to enable replicated implementations of the specification (although in practice
most implementations are centralized).


===== page 290 =====
272 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.24 Java class AlarmTupleJS
import net.jini.core.entry.*;
public class AlarmTupleJS implements Entry {
public String alarmType;
public AlarmTupleJS() {
}
public AlarmTupleJS(String alarmType) {
this.alarmType = alarmType;
}
}
Programming with JavaSpaces: JavaSpaces allows the programmer to create any number
of instances of a space,where a space is a shared, persistent repository of objects (thus
offering an object space in the terminology introduced above). More specifically, an
item in a JavaSpace is referred to as an entry: a group of objects contained in a class that
implements net.jini.core.entry.Entry. Note that with entries containing objects (rather
than tuples), it is possible to associate arbitrary behaviour with entries, thus significantly
increasing the expressive power of the approach.
The operations defined on JavaSpaces are summarized in Figure 6.23 (showing
the full signatures of each of the operations) and can be described as follows:
(cid:129) A process can place an entry into a JavaSpace instance with the write method. As
with Jini, an entry can have an associated lease(see Section 5.4.3), which is the
time for which access is granted to the associated objects. This can be forever
(Lease.FOREVER) or can be a numerical value specified in milliseconds. After
this period, the entry is destroyed. The write operation can also be used in the
context of a transaction, as discussed below (a value of null indicates that this is
not a transactional operation). The write operation returns a Lease value
representing the lease granted by the JavaSpace (which may be less than the time
requested).
(cid:129) A process can access an entry in a JavaSpace with either the read or take
operation; read returns a copy of a matching entry and take removes a matching
entry from the JavaSpace (as in the general programming model presented above).
The matching requirements are specified by a template, which is of type entry.
Particular fields in the template may be set to specific values and others can be left
unspecified. A match is then defined as an entry that is of the same class as the
template (or a valid subclass) and where there is an exact match for the set of
specified values. As with write,read and take can be carried out in the context of
a specified transaction (discussed below). The two operations are also blocking;
the final parameter specifies a timeout representing the maximum length of time
that a particular process or thread will block, for example to deal with the failure
of a process supplying a given entry. The readIfExists and takeIfExists operations


===== page 291 =====
SECTION 6.5 SHARED MEMORY APPROACHES 273
Figure 6.25 Java class FireAlarmJS
import net.jini.space.JavaSpace;
public class FireAlarmJS {
public void raise() {
try {
JavaSpace space = SpaceAccessor.findSpace("AlarmSpace");
AlarmTupleJS tuple = new AlarmTupleJS("Fire!");
space.write(tuple, null, 60*60*1000);
catch (Exception e) {
}
}
}
are equivalent to read and take, respectively, but these operations will return a
matching entry if one exists; otherwise, they will return null.
(cid:129) Thenotify operation uses Jini distributed event notification, mentioned in Section
6.3 to register an interest in a given event – in this case, the arrival of entries
matching a given template. This registration is governed by a lease, that is, the
length of time the registration should persist in the JavaSpace. Notification is via
a specified RemoteEventListener interface. Once again, this operation can be
carried out in the context of a specified transaction.
As mentioned throughout the discussion above,operations in JavaSpaces can take place
in the context of a transaction, ensuring that either all or none of the operations will be
executed. Transactions are distributed entities and can span multiple JavaSpaces and
multiple participating processes. Discussion of the general concept of transactions is
deferred until Chapter 16.
A simple example: We conclude this examination of JavaSpaces by presenting an
example, the intelligent fire alarm example first introduced in Section 6.2.3 and revisited
in Section 6.4.3. In this example, there is a need to disseminate an emergency message
to all recipients when a fire event is detected.
We start by defining an entry object of type AlarmTupleJS, as shown in Figure
6.24. This is relatively straightforward and shows the creation of a new entry with one
field, the alarmType. The associated fire alarm code is shown in Figure 6.25. The first
step in raising an alarm is to gain access to an appropriate instance of a JavaSpace (called
"AlarmSpace"), which we assume is already created. Most implementations of
JavaSpaces provide utility functions for this and, for simplicity, this is what we show in
this code, using a utility class SpaceAccessor and method findSpace as provided in
GigaSpaces (for convenience, a copy of this class is provided on the companion web site
for the book [www.cdk5.net]). An entry is then created as an instance of the previously
definedAlarmTupleJS. This entry has only one field, a string called alarmType, and this


===== page 292 =====
274 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.26 Java class FireAlarmReceiverJS
import net.jini.space.JavaSpace;
public class FireAlarmConsumerJS {
public String await() {
try {
JavaSpace space = SpaceAccessor.findSpace();
AlarmTupleJS template = new AlarmTupleJS("Fire!");
AlarmTupleJS recvd = (AlarmTupleJS) space.read(template, null,
Long.MAX_VALUE);
return recvd.alarmType;
}
catch (Exception e) {
return null;
}
}
}
is set to "Fire!"”. Finally, this entry is placed into the JavaSpace using the write method,
where it will remain for one hour. This code can then be called using the following:
FireAlarmJS alarm = new FireAlarmJS();
alarm.raise();
The corresponding code for the consumer end is shown in Figure 6.26. Access to the
appropriate JavaSpace is obtained in the same manner. Following this, a template is
created, the single field is set to "Fire!", and an associated read method is invoked. Note
that by setting the field to "Fire!", we ensure that only entries with this type and this
value will be returned (leaving the field blank would make any entry of type
AlarmTupleJS a valid match). This is called as follows in a consumer:
FireAlarmConsumerJS alarmCall = new FireAlarmConsumerJS();
String msg = alarmCall.await();
System.out.println("Alarm received: " + msg);
This simple example illustrates how easy it is to write multiparty applications using
JavaSpaces that are both time- and space-uncoupled.
6.6 Summary
This chapter has examined indirect communication in detail, complementing the study
of remote invocation paradigms in the previous chapter. We defined indirect
communication in terms of communication through an intermediary, with a resultant
uncoupling between producers and consumers of messages. This leads to interesting
properties, particularly in terms of dealing with change and establishing fault-tolerant
strategies.


===== page 293 =====
SECTION 6.6 SUMMARY 275
We have considered five styles of indirect communication in this chapter:
(cid:129) group communication;
(cid:129) publish-subscribe systems;
(cid:129) message queues;
(cid:129) distributed shared memory;
(cid:129) tuple spaces.
The discussion has emphasized their commonalities in terms of all supporting indirect
communication through forms of intermediary including groups, channels or topics,
queues, shared memory or tuple spaces. Content-based publish-subscribe systems
communicate through the publish-subscribe system as a whole, with subscriptions
effectively defining logical channels managed by content-based routing.
As well as focusing on the commonalities, it is instructive to consider the key
differences between the various approaches. We start by reconsidering the level of space
and time uncoupling, picking up on the discussion in Section 6.1. All the techniques
considered in this chapter exhibit space uncoupling in that messages are directed to an
intermediary and not to any specific recipient or recipients. The position with respect to
time uncoupling is more subtle and dependent on the level of persistency in the
paradigm. Message queues, distributed shared memory and tuple spaces all exhibit time
uncoupling. The other paradigms may, depending on the implementation. For example,
in group communication, it is possible in some implementations for a receiver to join a
group at an arbitrary point in time and to be brought up-to-date with respect to previous
message exchanges (this is an optional feature in JGroups, for example, selected by
constructing an appropriate protocol stack). Many publish-subscribe systems do not
support persistency of events and hence are not time-uncoupled, but there are
exceptions. JMS, for example, does support persistent events, in keeping with its
integration of publish-subscribe and message queues.
The next observation is that the initial three techniques (groups, publish-subscribe
and message queues) offer a programming model that emphasizes communication
(through messages or events), whereas distributed shared memory and tuple spaces offer
a more state-based abstraction. This is a fundamental difference and one that has
significant repercussions in terms of scalability; in general terms, the communication-
based abstractions have the potential to scale to very large scale systems with
appropriate routing infrastructure (although this is not the case for group communication
because of the need to maintain group membership, as discussed in Section 6.2.2). In
contrast, the two state-based approaches have limitations with respect to scaling. This
stems from the need to maintain consistent views of the shared state, for example
between multiple readers and writers of shared memory. The situation with tuple spaces
is a bit more subtle given the immutable nature of tuples. The key problem rests with
implementing the destructive read operation, take, in a large-scale system; it is an
interesting observation that without this operation, tuple spaces look very much like
publish-subscribe systems (and hence are potentially highly scalable).
Most of the above systems also offer one-to-many styles of communication, that
is, multicast in terms of the communication-based services and global access to shared
values in the state-based abstractions. The exceptions are message queuing, which is
fundamentally point-to-point (and hence often offered in combination with publish-


===== page 294 =====
276 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
Figure 6.27 Summary of indirect communication styles
Groups Publish- Message queues DSM Tuple spaces
subscribe systems
Space- Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
uncoupled
Time- uncoupled Possible Possible Yes Yes Yes
Style of service Communication- Communication- Communication- State-based State-based
based based based
Communication 1-to-many 1-to-many 1-to-1 1-to-many 1-1 or 1-to-many
pattern
Main intent Reliable Information Information Parallel and Parallel and
distributed dissemination or dissemination or distributed distributed
computing EAI; mobile and EAI; computation computation;
ubiquitous commercial mobile and
systems transaction ubiquitous
processing systems
Scalability Limited Possible Possible Limited Limited
Associative No Content-based No No Yes
publish-subscribe
only
subscribe systems in commercial middleware), tuple spaces, which can be either one-to-
many or point-to-point depending on whether receiving processes use the read or take
operations, respectively.
There are also differences in intent in the various systems. Group communication
is mainly designed to support reliable distributed systems, and hence the emphasis is on
providing algorithmic support for reliability and ordering of message delivery.
Interestingly, the algorithms to ensure reliability and ordering (especially the latter) can
have a significant negative effect on scalability for similar reasons to maintaining
consistent views of shared state. Publish-subscribe systems have largely been targeted
at information dissemination (for example, in financial systems) and for Enterprise
Application Integration. Finally, the shared memory approaches have generally been
applied in parallel and distributed processing, including in the Grid community
(although tuple spaces have been used effectively across a variety of application
domains). Both publish-subscribe systems and tuple space communication have found
favour in mobile and ubiquitous computing due to their support for volatile
environments (as discussed in Chapter 19).
One other key issue associated with the five schemes is that both content-based
publish-subscribe and tuple spaces offer a form of associative addressing based on
content, allowing pattern matching between subscriptions and events or templates
against tuples, respectively. The other approaches do not.
This discussion is summarized in Figure 6.27.


===== page 295 =====
EXERCISES 277
We have not considered issues related to quality of service in this analysis. Many
message queue systems do offer intrinsic support for reliability in the form of
transactions. More generally, however, quality of service remains a key challenge for
indirect communication paradigms. Indeed, space and time uncoupling by their very
nature make it difficult to reason about end-to-end properties of the system, such as real-
time behaviour or security, and hence this is an important area for further research.
EXERCISES
6.1 Construct an argument as to why indirect communication may be appropriate in volatile
environments. To what extent can this be traced to time uncoupling, space uncoupling
or indeed a combination of both? page 230
6.2 Section 6.1 states that message passing is both time- and space-coupled – that is,
messages are both directed towards a particular entity and require the receiver to be
present at the time of the message send. Consider the case, though, where messages are
directed towards a name rather than an address and this name is resolved using DNS.
Does such a system exhibit the same level of indirection? page 231, Section 13.2.3
6.3 Section 6.1 refers to systems that are space-coupled but time- uncoupled – that is,
messages are directed towards a given receiver (or receivers), but that receiver can have
a lifetime independent from the sender’s. Can you construct a communication paradigm
with these properties? For example, does email fall into this category? page 231
6.4 As a second example, consider the communication paradigm referred to as queued RPC,
as introduced in Rover [Joseph et al. 1997]. Rover is a toolkit to support distributed
systems programming in mobile environments where participants in communication
may become disconnected for periods of time. The system offers the RPC paradigm and
hence calls are directed towards a given server (clearly space-coupled). The calls,
though, are routed through an intermediary, a queue at the sending side, and are
maintained in the queue until the receiver is available. To what extent is this time-
uncoupled? Hint: consider the almost philosophical question of whether a recipient that
is temporarily unavailable exists at that point in time. page 231, Chapter 19
6.5 If a communication paradigm is asynchronous, is it also time-uncoupled? Explain your
answer with examples as appropriate. page 232
6.6 In the context of a group communication service, provide example message exchanges
that illustrate the difference between causal and total ordering. page 236
6.7 Consider the FireAlarm example as written using JGroups (Section 6.2.3). Suppose this
was generalized to support a variety of alarm types, such as fire, flood, intrusion and so
on. What are the requirements of this application in terms of reliability and ordering?
page 230, page 240


===== page 296 =====
278 CHAPTER 6 INDIRECT COMMUNICATION
6.8 Suggest a design for a notification mailbox service that is intended to store notifications
on behalf of multiple subscribers, allowing subscribers to specify when they require
notifications to be delivered. Explain how subscribers that are not always active can
make use of the service you describe. How will the service deal with subscribers that
crash while they have delivery turned on? page 245
6.9 In publish-subscribe systems, explain how channel-based approaches can trivially be
implemented using a group communication service? Why is this a less optimal strategy
for implementing a content-based approach? page 245
6.10 Using the filtering-based routing algorithm in Figure 6.11 as a starting point, develop an
alternative algorithm that illustrates how the use of advertisements can result in
significant optimization in terms of message traffic generated. page 251
6.11 Construct a step-by-step guide explaining the operation of the alternative rendezvous-
based routing algorithm shown in Figure 6.12. page 252
6.12 Building on your answer to Exercise 6.11, discuss two possible implementations of
EN(e) and SN(s). Why must the intersection of EN(e) and SN(s) be non-null for a given
e that matches s (the intersection rule)? Does this apply in your possible
implementations? page 252
6.13 Explain how the loose coupling inherent in message queues can aid with Enterprise
Application Integration. As in Exercise 6.1, consider to what extent this can be traced to
time uncoupling, space uncoupling or a combination of both. page 254
6.14 Consider the version of the FireAlarm program written in JMS (Section 6.4.3). How
would you extend the consumer to receive alarms only from a given location?
page 261
6.15 Explain in which respects DSM is suitable or unsuitable for client-server systems.
page 262
6.16 Discuss whether message passing or DSM is preferable for fault-tolerant applications.
page 262
6.17 Assuming a DSM system is implemented in middleware without any hardware support
and in a platform-neutral manner, how would you deal with the problem of differing data
representations on heterogeneous computers? Does your solution extend to pointers?
page 262
6.18 How would you implement the equivalent of a remote procedure call using a tuple
space? What are the advantages and disadvantages of implementing a remote procedure
call–style interaction in this way? page 265
6.19 How would you implement a semaphore using a tuple space? page 265
6.20 Implement a replicated tuple space using the algorithm of Xu and Liskov [1989].
Explain how this algorithm uses the semantics of tuple space operations to optimize the
replication strategy. page 269


===== page 297 =====
7
OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
7.1 Introduction
7.2 The operating system layer
7.3 Protection
7.4 Processes and threads
7.5 Communication and invocation
7.6 Operating system architecture
7.7 Virtualization at the operating system level
7.8 Summary
This chapter describes how middleware is supported by the operating system facilities at
the nodes of a distributed system. The operating system facilitates the encapsulation and
protection of resources inside servers and it supports the mechanisms required to access
these resources, including communication and scheduling.
An important theme of the chapter is the role of the system kernel. The chapter aims
to give the reader an understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of splitting
functionality between protection domains – in particular, of splitting functionality between
kernel- and user-level code. The trade-offs between kernel-level facilities and user-level
facilities are discussed, including the tension between efficiency and robustness.
The chapter examines the design and implementation of multi-threaded processing
and communication facilities. It goes on to explore the main kernel architectures that have
been devised and looks at the important role that virtualization is playing in operating
system architecture.
279


===== page 298 =====
280 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
7.1 Introduction
Chapter 2 introduced the chief software layers in a distributed system. We have learned
that an important aspect of distributed systems is resource sharing. Client applications
invoke operations on resources that are often on another node or at least in another
process. Applications (in the form of clients) and services (in the form of resource
managers) use the middleware layer for their interactions. Middleware enables remote
communication between objects or processes at the nodes of a distributed system.
Chapter 5 explained the main types of remote invocation found in middleware, such as
Java RMI and CORBA, with Chapter 6 exploring alternative indirect styles of
communication. In this chapter we shall focus on support for such remote
communication, without real-time guarantees. (Chapter 20 examines support for
multimedia communication, which is real-time and stream-oriented.)
Below the middleware layer is the operating system (OS) layer, which is the
subject of this chapter. Here we examine the relationship between the two, and in
particular how well the requirements of middleware can be met by the operating system.
Those requirements include efficient and robust access to physical resources, and the
flexibility to implement a variety of resource-management policies.
The task of any operating system is to provide problem-oriented abstractions of
the underlying physical resources – the processors, memory, networks, and storage
media. An operating system such as UNIX (and its variants, such as Linux and Mac OS
X) or Windows (and its variants, such as XP, Vista and Windows 7) provides the
programmer with, for example, files rather than disk blocks, and with sockets rather than
raw network access. It takes over the physical resources on a single node and manages
them to present these resource abstractions through the system-call interface.
Before we begin our detailed coverage of the operating system’s middleware
support role, it is useful to gain some historical perspective by examining two operating
system concepts that have come about during the development of distributed systems:
network operating systems and distributed operating systems. Definitions vary, but the
concepts behind them are something like the following.
Both UNIX and Windows are examples of network operating systems. They have
a networking capability built into them and so can be used to access remote resources.
Access is network-transparent for some – not all – types of resource. For example,
through a distributed file system such as NFS, users have network-transparent access to
files. That is, many of the files that users access are stored remotely, on a server, and this
is largely transparent to their applications.
But the defining characteristic is that the nodes running a network operating
system retain autonomy in managing their own processing resources. In other words,
there are multiple system images, one per node. With a network operating system, a user
can remotely log into another computer, using ssh, for example, and run processes there.
However, while the operating system manages the processes running at its own node, it
does not manage processes across the nodes.
By contrast, one could envisage an operating system in which users are never
concerned with where their programs run, or the location of any resources. There is a
single system image. The operating system has control over all the nodes in the system,
and it transparently locates new processes at whatever node suits its scheduling policies.


===== page 299 =====
SECTION 7.2 THE OPERATING SYSTEM LAYER 281
For example, it could create a new process at the least-loaded node in the system, to
prevent individual nodes becoming unfairly overloaded.
An operating system that produces a single system image like this for all the
resources in a distributed system is called a distributed operating system [Tanenbaum
and van Renesse 1985].
Middlewareandnetworkoperatingsystems • In fact, there are no distributed operating
systems in general use, only network operating systems such as UNIX, Mac OS and
Windows. This is likely to remain the case, for two main reasons. The first is that users
have much invested in their application software, which often meets their current
problem-solving needs; they will not adopt a new operating system that will not run their
applications, whatever efficiency advantages it offers. Attempts have been made to
emulate UNIX and other operating system kernels on top of new kernels, but the
emulations’ performance has not been satisfactory. Anyway, keeping emulations of all
the major operating systems up-to-date as they evolve would be a huge undertaking.
The second reason against the adoption of distributed operating systems is that
users tend to prefer to have a degree of autonomy for their machines, even in a closely
knit organization. This is particularly so because of performance [Douglis and
Ousterhout 1991]. For example, Jones needs good interactive responsiveness while she
writes her documents and would resent it if Smith’s programs were slowing her down.
The combination of middleware and network operating systems provides an
acceptable balance between the requirement for autonomy on the one hand and network-
transparent resource access on the other. The network operating system enables users to
run their favourite word processors and other standalone applications. Middleware
enables them to take advantage of services that become available in their distributed
system.
The next section explains the function of the operating system layer. Section 7.3
examines low-level mechanisms for resource protection, which we need to understand
in order to appreciate the relationship between processes and threads, and the role of the
kernel itself. Section 7.4 goes on to examine the process, address space and thread
abstractions. Here the main topics are concurrency, local resource management and
protection, and scheduling. Section 7.5 then covers communication as part of invocation
mechanisms. Section 7.6 discusses the different types of operating system architecture,
including the so-called monolithic and microkernel designs. The reader can find case
studies of the Mach kernel and the Amoeba, Chorus and Clouds operating systems at
www.cdk5.net/oss. The chapter concludes by examining the role that virtualization is
playing in the design of operating systems, featuring a case study of the Xen approach
to virtualization (Section 7.7).
7.2 The operating system layer
Users will only be satisfied if their middleware–OS combination has good performance.
Middleware runs on a variety of OS–hardware combinations (platforms) at the nodes of
a distributed system. The OS running at a node – a kernel and associated user-level
services such as communication libraries – provides its own flavour of abstractions of
local hardware resources for processing, storage and communication. Middleware


===== page 300 =====
282 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.1 System layers
Applications, services
Middleware
OS: kernel, OS1 OS2
libraries & Processes, threads, Processes, threads,
servers communication, ... communication, ...
Platform
Computer & Computer &
network hardware network hardware
Node 1 Node 2
utilizes a combination of these local resources to implement its mechanisms for remote
invocations between objects or processes at the nodes.
Figure 7.1 shows how the operating system layer at each of two nodes supports a
common middleware layer in providing a distributed infrastructure for applications and
services.
Our goal in this chapter is to examine the impact of particular OS mechanisms on
middleware’s ability to deliver distributed resource sharing to users. Kernels and the
client and server processes that execute upon them are the chief architectural
components that concern us. Kernels and server processes are the components that
manage resources and present clients with an interface to the resources. As such, we
require at least the following of them:
Encapsulation: They should provide a useful service interface to their resources –
that is, a set of operations that meet their clients’ needs. Details such as management
of memory and devices used to implement resources should be hidden from clients.
Protection: Resources require protection from illegitimate accesses – for example,
files are protected from being read by users without read permissions, and device
registers are protected from application processes.
Concurrent processing: Clients may share resources and access them concurrently.
Resource managers are responsible for achieving concurrency transparency.
Clients access resources by making, for example, remote method invocations to a server
object, or system calls to a kernel. We call a means of accessing an encapsulated
resource an invocation mechanism, however it is implemented. A combination of
libraries, kernels and servers may be called upon to perform the following invocation-
related tasks:
Communication: Operation parameters and results have to be passed to and from
resource managers, over a network or within a computer.
Scheduling:When an operation is invoked, its processing must be scheduled within
the kernel or server.


===== page 301 =====
SECTION 7.2 THE OPERATING SYSTEM LAYER 283
Figure 7.2 Core OS functionality
Process manager
Communication
manager
Thread manager Memory manager
Supervisor
Figure 7.2 shows the core OS functionality that we shall be concerned with: process and
thread management, memory management and communication between processes on
the same computer (horizontal divisions in the figure denote dependencies). The kernel
supplies much of this functionality – all of it in the case of some operating systems.
OS software is designed to be portable between computer architectures where
possible. This means that the majority of it is coded in a high-level language such as C,
C++ or Modula-3, and that its facilities are layered so that machine-dependent
components are reduced to a minimal bottom layer. Some kernels can execute on
shared-memory multiprocessors, which are described in the box below.
Shared-memory multiprocessors • Shared-memory multiprocessor computers are
equipped with several processors that share one or more modules of memory (RAM).
The processors may also have their own private memory. Multiprocessor computers
can be constructed in a variety of forms [Stone 1993]. The simplest and least
expensive multiprocessors are constructed by incorporating a circuit board holding a
few (2–8) processors in a personal computer.
In the common symmetric processing architecture, each processor executes the
same kernel and the kernels play largely equivalent roles in managing the hardware
resources. The kernels share key data structures, such as the queue of runnable
threads, but some of their working data is private. Each processor can execute a
thread simultaneously, accessing data in the shared memory, which may be private
(hardware-protected) or shared with other threads.
Multiprocessors can be used for many high-performance computing tasks. In
distributed systems, they are particularly useful for the implementation of high-
performance servers because the server can run a single program with several threads
that handle several requests from clients simultaneously – for example, providing
access to a shared database (see Section 7.4)


===== page 302 =====
284 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
The core OS components and their responsibilities are:
Process manager: Creation of and operations upon processes. A process is a unit of
resource management, including an address space and one or more threads.
Thread manager: Thread creation, synchronization and scheduling. Threads are
schedulable activities attached to processes and are fully described in Section 7.4.
Communication manager: Communication between threads attached to different
processes on the same computer. Some kernels also support communication between
threads in remote processes. Other kernels have no notion of other computers built
into them, and an additional service is required for external communication. Section
7.5 discusses the communication design.
Memory manager: Management of physical and virtual memory. Section 7.4 and
Section 7.5 describe the utilization of memory management techniques for efficient
data copying and sharing.
Supervisor: Dispatching of interrupts, system call traps and other exceptions; control
of memory management unit and hardware caches; processor and floating-point unit
register manipulations. This is known as the Hardware Abstraction Layer in
Windows. The reader is referred to Bacon [2002] and Tanenbaum [2007] for a fuller
description of the computer-dependent aspects of the kernel.
7.3 Protection
We said above that resources require protection from illegitimate accesses. However,
threats to a system’s integrity do not come only from maliciously contrived code.
Benign code that contains a bug or that has unanticipated behaviour may cause part of
the rest of the system to behave incorrectly.
To understand what we mean by an ‘illegitimate access’ to a resource, consider a
file. Let us suppose, for the sake of explanation, that open files have only two operations,
read and write. Protecting the file consists of two sub-problems. The first is to ensure
that each of the file’s two operations can be performed only by clients with the right to
perform it. For example, Smith, who owns the file, has read and write rights to it. Jones
may only perform the read operation. An illegitimate access here would be if Jones
somehow managed to perform a write operation on the file. A complete solution to this
resource-protection sub-problem in a distributed system requires cryptographic
techniques, and we defer it to Chapter 11.
The other type of illegitimate access, which we address here, is where a
misbehaving client sidesteps the operations that a resource exports. In our example, this
would be if Smith or Jones somehow managed to execute an operation that was neither
read nor write. Suppose, for example, that Smith managed to access the file pointer
variable directly. She could then construct a setFilePointerRandomly operation, that sets
the file pointer to a random number. Of course, this is a meaningless operation that
would upset normal use of the file.


===== page 303 =====
SECTION 7.3 PROTECTION 285
We can protect resources from illegitimate invocations such as
setFilePointerRandomly. One way is to use a type-safe programming language, such as
Sing#, an extension of C# used in the Singularity project [Hunt et al. 2007], or Modula-
3. In type-safe languages, no module may access a target module unless it has a
reference to it – it cannot make up a pointer to it, as would be possible in C or C++ – and
it may only use its reference to the target module to perform the invocations (method
calls or procedure calls) that the programmer of the target made available to it. It may
not, in other words, arbitrarily change the target’s variables. By contrast, in C++ the
programmer may cast a pointer however she likes, and thus perform non-type-safe
invocations.
We can also employ hardware support to protect modules from one another at the
level of individual invocations, regardless of the language in which they are written. To
operate this scheme on a general-purpose computer, we require a kernel.
Kernelsandprotection • The kernel is a program that is distinguished by the facts that
it remains loaded from system initialization and its code is executed with complete
access privileges for the physical resources on its host computer. In particular, it can
control the memory management unit and set the processor registers so that no other
code may access the machine’s physical resources except in acceptable ways.
Most processors have a hardware mode register whose setting determines whether
privileged instructions can be executed, such as those used to determine which
protection tables are currently employed by the memory management unit. A kernel
process executes with the processor in supervisor (privileged) mode; the kernel arranges
that other processes execute in user(unprivileged) mode.
The kernel also sets up address spaces to protect itself and other processes from
the accesses of an aberrant process, and to provide processes with their required virtual
memory layout. An address space is a collection of ranges of virtual memory locations,
in each of which a specified combination of memory access rights applies, such as read-
only or read-write. A process cannot access memory outside its address space. The terms
user process or user-level process are normally used to describe one that executes in
user mode and has a user-level address space (that is, one with restricted memory access
rights compared with the kernel’s address space).
When a process executes application code, it executes in a distinct user-level
address space for that application; when the same process executes kernel code, it
executes in the kernel’s address space. The process can safely transfer from a user-level
address space to the kernel’s address space via an exception such as an interrupt or a
system call trap – the invocation mechanism for resources managed by the kernel. A
system call trap is implemented by a machine-level TRAP instruction, which puts the
processor into supervisor mode and switches to the kernel address space. When the
TRAP instruction is executed, as with any type of exception, the hardware forces the
processor to execute a kernel-supplied handler function, in order that no process may
gain illicit control of the hardware.
Programs pay a price for protection. Switching between address spaces may take
many processor cycles, and a system call trap is a more expensive operation than a
simple procedure or method call. We shall see in Section 7.5.1 how these penalties factor
into invocation costs.


===== page 304 =====
286 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
7.4 Processes and threads
The traditional operating system notion of a process that executes a single activity was
found in the 1980s to be unequal to the requirements of distributed systems – and also
to those of more sophisticated single-computer applications that require internal
concurrency. The problem, as we shall show, is that the traditional process makes
sharing between related activities awkward and expensive.
The solution reached was to enhance the notion of a process so that it could be
associated with multiple activities. Nowadays, a process consists of an execution
environment together with one or more threads. A thread is the operating system
abstraction of an activity (the term derives from the phrase ‘thread of execution’). An
execution environment is the unit of resource management: a collection of local kernel-
managed resources to which its threads have access. An execution environment
primarily consists of:
(cid:129) an address space;
(cid:129) thread synchronization and communication resources such as semaphores and
communication interfaces (for example, sockets);
(cid:129) higher-level resources such as open files and windows.
Execution environments are normally expensive to create and manage, but several
threads can share them – that is, they can share all resources accessible within them. In
other words, an execution environment represents the protection domain in which its
threads execute.
Threads can be created and destroyed dynamically, as needed. The central aim of
having multiple threads of execution is to maximize the degree of concurrent execution
between operations, thus enabling the overlap of computation with input and output, and
enabling concurrent processing on multiprocessors. This can be particularly helpful
within servers, where concurrent processing of clients’ requests can reduce the tendency
for servers to become bottlenecks. For example, one thread can process a client’s request
while a second thread servicing another request waits for a disk access to complete.
An execution environment provides protection from threads outside it, so that the
data and other resources containedin it are by default inaccessible to threads residing in
An analogy for threads and processes • The following memorable, if slightly unsa-
voury, way to think of the concepts of threads and execution environments was pub-
lished on the comp.os.mach USENET group and is by Chris Lloyd. An execution
environment consists of a stoppered jar and the air and food within it. Initially, there
is one fly – a thread – in the jar. This fly can produce other flies and kill them, as can
its progeny. Any fly can consume any resource (air or food) in the jar. Flies can be
programmed to queue up in an orderly manner to consume resources. If they lack this
discipline, they might bump into one another within the jar – that is, collide and pro-
duce unpredictable results when attempting to consume the same resources in an un-
constrained manner. Flies can communicate with (send messages to) flies in other
jars, but none may escape from the jar, and no fly from outside may enter it. In this
view, originally a UNIX process was a single jar with a single sterile fly within it.


===== page 305 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 287
Figure 7.3 Address space
2N
Auxiliary
regions
Stack
Heap
Text
0
other execution environments. But certain kernels allow the controlled sharing of
resources such as physical memory between execution environments residing at the
same computer.
As many older operating systems allow only one thread per process, we shall
sometimes use the term multi-threaded process for emphasis. Confusingly, in some
programming models and operating system designs the term ‘process’ means what we
have called a thread. The reader may encounter in the literature the terms heavyweight
process, where an execution environment is taken to be included, and lightweight
process, where it is not. See the box on the preceding page for an analogy describing
threads and execution environments.
7.4.1 Address spaces
An address space, introduced in the previous section, is a unit of management of a
process’s virtual memory. It is large (typically up to 232 bytes, and sometimes up to 264
bytes) and consists of one or more regions, separated by inaccessible areas of virtual
memory. A region (Figure 7.3) is an area of contiguous virtual memory that is accessible
by the threads of the owning process. Regions do not overlap. Note that we distinguish
between the regions and their contents. Each region is specified by the following
properties:
(cid:129) its extent (lowest virtual address and size);
(cid:129) read/write/execute permissions for the process’s threads;
(cid:129) whether it can be grown upwards or downwards.


===== page 306 =====
288 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Note that this model is page-oriented rather than segment-oriented. Regions, unlike
segments, would eventually overlap if they were extended in size. Gaps are left between
regions to allow for growth. This representation of an address space as a sparse set of
disjoint regions is a generalization of the UNIX address space, which has three regions:
a fixed, unmodifiable text region containing program code; a heap, part of which is
initialized by values stored in the program’s binary file, and which is extensible towards
higher virtual addresses; and a stack, which is extensible towards lower virtual
addresses.
The provision of an indefinite number of regions is motivated by several factors.
One of these is the need to support a separate stack for each thread. Allocating a separate
stack region to each thread makes it possible to detect attempts to exceed the stack limits
and to control each stack’s growth. Unallocated virtual memory lies beyond each stack
region, and attempts to access this will cause an exception (a page fault). The alternative
is to allocate stacks for threads on the heap, but then it is difficult to detect when a thread
has exceeded its stack limit.
Another motivation is to enable files in general – not just the text and data sections
of binary files – to be mapped into the address space. A mapped file is one that is
accessed as an array of bytes in memory. The virtual memory system ensures that
accesses made in memory are reflected in the underlying file storage. Section
CDK3-18.6 (in www.cdk5.net/oss/mach) describes how the Mach kernel extends the
abstraction of virtual memory so that regions can correspond to arbitrary ‘memory
objects’ and not just to files.
The need to share memory between processes, or between processes and the
kernel, is another factor leading to extra regions in the address space. A shared memory
region (or shared region for short) is one that is backed by the same physical memory
as one or more regions belonging to other address spaces. Processes therefore access
identical memory contents in the regions that are shared, while their non-shared regions
remain protected. The uses of shared regions include the following:
Libraries: Library code can be very large and would waste considerable memory if it
was loaded separately into every process that used it. Instead, a single copy of the
library code can be shared by being mapped as a region in the address spaces of
processes that require it.
Kernel: Often the kernel code and data are mapped into every address space at the
same location. When a process makes a system call or an exception occurs, there is
no need to switch to a new set of address mappings.
Data sharing and communication: Two processes, or a process and the kernel, might
need to share data in order to cooperate on some task. It can be considerably more
efficient for the data to be shared by being mapped as regions in both address spaces
than by being passed in messages between them. The use of region sharing for
communication is described in Section 7.5.


===== page 307 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 289
7.4.2 Creation of a new process
The creation of a new process has traditionally been an indivisible operation provided
by the operating system. For example, the UNIX fork system call creates a process with
an execution environment copied from the caller (except for the return value from fork).
The UNIX exec system call transforms the calling process into one executing the code
of a named program.
For a distributed system, the design of the process-creation mechanism has to take
into account the utilization of multiple computers; consequently, the process-support
infrastructure is divided into separate system services.
The creation of a new process can be separated into two independent aspects:
(cid:129) the choice of a target host, for example, the host may be chosen from among the
nodes in a cluster of computers acting as a compute server, as introduced in
Chapter 1;
(cid:129) the creation of an execution environment (and an initial thread within it).
Choiceofprocesshost • The choice of the node at which the new process will reside –
the process allocation decision – is a matter of policy. In general, process allocation
policies range from always running new processes at their originator’s workstation to
sharing the processing load between a set of computers. Eager et al. [1986] distinguish
two policy categories for load sharing.
The transfer policy determines whether to situate a new process locally or
remotely. This may depend, for example, on whether the local node is lightly or heavily
loaded.
Thelocation policy determines which node should host a new process selected for
transfer. This decision may depend on the relative loads of nodes, on their machine
architectures or on any specialized resources they may possess. The V system [Cheriton
1984] and Sprite [Douglis and Ousterhout 1991] both provide commands for users to
execute a program at a currently idle workstation (there are often many of these at any
given time) chosen by the operating system. In the Amoeba system [Tanenbaum et al.
1990], the run server chooses a host for each process from a shared pool of processors.
In all cases, the choice of target host is transparent to the programmer and the user.
Those programming for explicit parallelism or fault tolerance, however, may require a
means of specifying process location.
Process location policies may be static or adaptive. The former operate without
regard to the current state of the system, although they are designed according to the
system’s expected long-term characteristics. They are based on a mathematical analysis
aimed at optimizing a parameter such as the overall process throughput. They may be
deterministic (‘node A should always transfer processes to node B’) or probabilistic
(‘node A should transfer processes to any of nodes B–E at random’). Adaptive policies,
on the other hand, apply heuristics to make their allocation decisions, based on
unpredictable runtime factors such as a measure of the load on each node.
Load-sharing systems may be centralized, hierarchical or decentralized. In the
first case there is one load manager component, and in the second there are several,
organized in a tree structure. Load managers collect information about the nodes and use
it to allocate new processes to nodes. In hierarchical systems, managers make process
allocation decisions as far down the tree as possible, but managers may transfer


===== page 308 =====
290 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
processes to one another, via a common ancestor, under certain load conditions. In a
decentralized load-sharing system, nodes exchange information with one another
directly to make allocation decisions. The Spawn system [Waldspurger et al. 1992], for
example, considers nodes to be ‘buyers’ and ‘sellers’ of computational resources and
arranges them in a (decentralized) ‘market economy’.
In sender-initiated load-sharing algorithms, the node that requires a new process
to be created is responsible for initiating the transfer decision. It typically initiates a
transfer when its own load crosses a threshold. By contrast, in receiver-initiated
algorithms, a node whose load is below a given threshold advertises its existence to other
nodes so that relatively loaded nodes can transfer work to it.
Migratory load-sharing systems can shift load at any time, not just when a new
process is created. They use a mechanism called process migration: the transfer of an
executing process from one node to another. Milojicic et al. [1999] provide a collection
of papers on process migration and other types of mobility. While several process
migration mechanisms have been constructed, they have not been widely deployed. This
is largely because of their expense and the tremendous difficulty of extracting the state
of a process that lies within the kernel, in order to move it to another node.
Eager et al. [1986] studied three approaches to load sharing and concluded that
simplicity is an important property of any load-sharing scheme. This is because
relatively high overheads – for example, state-collection overheads – can outweigh the
advantages of more complex schemes.
Creationofanewexecutionenvironment • Once the host computer has been selected, a
new process requires an execution environment consisting of an address space with
initialized contents (and perhaps other resources, such as default open files).
There are two approaches to defining and initializing the address space of a newly
created process. The first approach is used where the address space is of a statically
defined format. For example, it could contain just a program text region, heap region and
stack region. In this case, the address space regions are created from a list specifying
their extent. Address space regions are initialized from an executable file or filled with
zeros as appropriate.
Alternatively, the address space can be defined with respect to an existing
execution environment. In the case of UNIX fork semantics, for example, the newly
created child process physically shares the parent’s text region and has heap and stack
regions that are copies of the parent’s in extent (as well as in initial contents). This
scheme has been generalized so that each region of the parent process may be inherited
by (or omitted from) the child process. An inherited region may either be shared with or
logically copied from the parent’s region. When parent and child share a region, the page
frames (units of physical memory corresponding to virtual memory pages) belonging to
the parent’s region are mapped simultaneously into the corresponding child region.
Mach [Accetta et al. 1986] and Chorus [Rozier et al. 1988, 1990], for example,
apply an optimization called copy-on-write when an inherited region is copied from the
parent. The region is copied, but no physical copying takes place by default. The page
frames that make up the inherited region are shared between the two address spaces. A
page in the region is only physically copied when one or another process attempts to
modify it.


===== page 309 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 291
Figure 7.4 Copy-on-write
Process A’s address space Process B’s address space
RB copied
from RA
RA RB
Kernel
Shared
frame
A’s page B’s page
table table
a) Before write b) After write
Copy-on-write is a general technique – for example, it is also used in copying
large messages – so we take some time to explain its operation here. Let us follow
through an example of regions RA and RB, whose memory is shared copy-on-write
between two processes, A and B (Figure 7.4). For the sake of definiteness, let us assume
that process A set region RA to be copy-inherited by its child, process B, and that the
region RB was thus created in process B.
We assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the pages belonging to region A are
resident in memory. Initially, all page frames associated with the regions are shared
between the two processes’ page tables. The pages are initially write-protected at the
hardware level, even though they may belong to regions that are logically writable. If a
thread in either process attempts to modify the data, a hardware exception called a page
fault is taken. Let us say that process B attempted the write. The page fault handler
allocates a new frame for process B and copies the original frame’s data into it byte for
byte. The old frame number is replaced by the new frame number in one process’s page
table – it does not matter which – and the old frame number is left in the other page table.
The two corresponding pages in processes A and B are then each made writable once
more at the hardware level. After all of this has taken place, process B’s modifying
instruction is allowed to proceed.


===== page 310 =====
292 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.5 Client and server with threads
Thread 2 makes
requests to server
Input-output
Receipt &
queuing
Thread 1
generates
results
Requests
N threads
Client
Server
7.4.3 Threads
The next key aspect of a process to consider in more detail is its threads. This section
examines the advantages of enabling client and server processes to possess more than
one thread. It then discusses programming with threads, using Java threads as a case
study, and ends with alternative designs for implementing threads.
Consider the server shown in Figure 7.5 (we shall turn to the client shortly). The
server has a pool of one or more threads, each of which repeatedly removes a request
from a queue of received requests and processes it. We shall not concern ourselves for
the moment with how the requests are received and queued up for the threads. Also, for
the sake of simplicity, we assume that each thread applies the same procedure to process
the requests. Let us assume that each request takes, on average, 2milliseconds of
processing plus 8milliseconds of I/O (input/output) delay when the server reads from a
disk (there is no caching). Let us further assume for the moment that the server executes
at a single-processor computer.
Consider the maximum server throughput, measured in client requests handled per
second, for different numbers of threads. If a single thread has to perform all processing,
then the turnaround time for handling any request is on average 2 + 8 = 10 milliseconds,
so this server can handle 100 client requests per second. Any new request messages that
arrive while the server is handling a request are queued at the server port.
Now consider what happens if the server pool contains two threads. We assume
that threads are independently schedulable – that is, one thread can be scheduled when
another becomes blocked for I/O. Then thread number two can process a second request
while thread number one is blocked, and vice versa. This increases the server
throughput. Unfortunately, in our example, the threads may become blocked behind the
single disk drive. If all disk requests are serialized and take 8 milliseconds each, then the
maximum throughput is 1000/8 = 125 requests per second.
Suppose, now, that disk block caching is introduced. The server keeps the data that
it reads in buffers in its address space; a server thread that is asked to retrieve data first
examines the shared cache and avoids accessing the disk if it finds the data there. If a
75% hit rate is achieved, the mean I/O time per request reduces to (0.75(cid:117)0 + 0.25(cid:3)(cid:117)(cid:3)8) =
2 milliseconds, and the maximum theoretical throughput increases to 500 requests per


===== page 311 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 293
second. But if the average processor time for a request has been increased to 2.5
milliseconds per request as a result of caching (it takes time to search for cached data on
every operation), then this figure cannot be reached. The server, limited by the
processor, can now handle at most 1000/2.5 = 400 requests per second.
The throughput can be increased by using a shared-memory multiprocessor to
ease the processor bottleneck. A multi-threaded process maps naturally onto a shared-
memory multiprocessor. The shared execution environment can be implemented in
shared memory, and the multiple threads can be scheduled to run on the multiple
processors. Consider now the case in which our example server executes at a
multiprocessor with two processors. Given that threads can be independently scheduled
to the different processors, then up to two threads can process requests in parallel. The
reader should check that two threads can process 444 requests per second and three or
more threads, bounded by the I/O time, can process 500 requests per second.
Architecturesformulti-threadedservers • We have described how multi-threading
enables servers to maximize their throughput, measured as the number of requests
processed per second. To describe the various ways of mapping requests to threads
within a server we summarize the account by Schmidt [1998], who describes the
threading architectures of various implementations of the CORBA Object Request
Broker (ORB). ORBs process requests that arrive over a set of connected sockets. Their
threading architectures are relevant to many types of server, regardless of whether
CORBA is used.
Figure 7.5 shows one of the possible threading architectures, the worker pool
architecture. In its simplest form, the server creates a fixed pool of ‘worker’ threads to
process the requests when it starts up. The module marked ‘receipt and queuing’ in
Figure 7.5 is typically implemented by an ‘I/O’ thread, which receives requests from a
collection of sockets or ports and places them on a shared request queue for retrieval by
the workers.
There is sometimes a requirement to treat the requests with varying priorities. For
example, a corporate web server could prioritize request processing according to the
class of customer from which the request derives [Bhatti and Friedrich 1999]. We may
handle varying request priorities by introducing multiple queues into the worker pool
architecture, so that the worker threads scan the queues in the order of decreasing
priority. A disadvantage of this architecture is its inflexibility: as we saw with our
worked-out example, the number of worker threads in the pool may be too few to deal
adequately with the current rate of request arrival. Another disadvantage is the high level
of switching between the I/O and worker threads as they manipulate the shared queue.
In the thread-per-request architecture (Figure 7.6a) the I/O thread spawns a new
worker thread for each request, and that worker destroys itself when it has processed the
request against its designated remote object. This architecture has the advantage that the
threads do not contend for a shared queue, and throughput is potentially maximized
because the I/O thread can create as many workers as there are outstanding requests. Its
disadvantage is the overhead of the thread creation and destruction operations.
The thread-per-connection architecture (Figure 7.6b) associates a thread with
each connection. The server creates a new worker thread when a client makes a
connection and destroys the thread when the client closes the connection. In between,
the client may make many requests over the connection, targeted at one or more remote


===== page 312 =====
294 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.6 Alternative server threading architectures (see also Figure 7.5)
per-connection threads per-object threads
workers
I/O remote remote I/O remote
objects
objects objects
a. Thread-per-request b. Thread-per-connection c. Thread-per-object
objects. The thread-per-object architecture (Figure 7.6c) associates a thread with each
remote object. An I/O thread receives requests and queues them for the workers, but this
time there is a per-object queue.
In each of these last two architectures the server benefits from lower thread-
management overheads compared with the thread-per-request architecture. Their
disadvantage is that clients may be delayed while a worker thread has several
outstanding requests but another thread has no work to perform.
Schmidt [1998] describes variations on these architectures as well as hybrids of
them, and discusses their advantages and disadvantages in more detail. Section 7.5
describes a different threading model in the context of invocations within a single
machine, in which client threads enter the server’s address space.
Threadswithinclients • Threads can be useful for clients as well as servers. Figure 7.5
also shows a client process with two threads. The first thread generates results to be
passed to a server by remote method invocation, but does not require a reply. Remote
method invocations typically block the caller, even when there is strictly no need to wait.
This client process can incorporate a second thread, which performs the remote method
invocations and blocks while the first thread is able to continue computing further
results. The first thread places its results in buffers, which are emptied by the second
thread. It is only blocked when all the buffers are full.
The case for multi-threaded clients is also evident in the example of web browsers.
Users experience substantial delays while pages are fetched; it is essential, therefore, for
browsers to handle multiple concurrent requests for web pages.
Threadsversusmultipleprocesses • We can see from the above examples the utility of
threads, which allow computation to be overlapped with I/O and, in the case of a
multiprocessor, with other computation. The reader may have noted, however, that the
same overlap could be achieved through the use of multiple single-threaded processes.
Why, then, should the multi-threaded process model be preferred? The answer is
twofold: threads are cheaper to create and manage than processes, and resource sharing
can be achieved more efficiently between threads than between processes because
threads share an execution environment.
Figure 7.7 shows some of the main state components that must be maintained for
execution environments and threads, respectively. An execution environment has an
address space, communication interfaces such as sockets, higher-level resources such as
open files and thread synchronization objects such as semaphores; it also lists the


===== page 313 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 295
Figure 7.7 State associated with execution environments and threads
Execution environment Thread
Address space tables Saved processor registers
Communication interfaces, open files Priority and execution state (such as
BLOCKED)
Semaphores, other synchronization Software interrupt handling information
objects
List of thread identifiers Execution environment identifier
Pages of address space resident in memory; hardware cache entries
threads associated with it. A thread has a scheduling priority, an execution state (such as
BLOCKED or RUNNABLE), saved processor register values when the thread is
BLOCKED, and state concerning the thread’s software interrupt handling. A software
interrupt is an event that causes a thread to be interrupted (similar to the case of a
hardware interrupt). If the thread has assigned a handler procedure, control is transferred
to it. UNIX signals are examples of software interrupts.
The figure shows that an execution environment and the threads belonging to it
are both associated with pages belonging to the address space held in main memory, and
data and instructions held in hardware caches.
We can summarize a comparison of processes and threads as follows:
(cid:129) Creating a new thread within an existing process is cheaper than creating a
process.
(cid:129) More importantly, switching to a different thread within the same process is
cheaper than switching between threads belonging to different processes.
(cid:129) Threads within a process may share data and other resources conveniently and
efficiently compared with separate processes.
(cid:129) But, by the same token, threads within a process are not protected from one
another.
Consider the cost of creating a new thread in an existing execution environment. The
main tasks are to allocate a region for its stack and to provide initial values for the
processor registers and the thread’s execution state (it may initially be SUSPENDED or
RUNNABLE) and priority. Since the execution environment exists, only an identifier for
this has to be placed in the thread’s descriptor record (which contains data necessary to
manage the thread’s execution).
The overheads associated with creating a process are in general considerably
greater than those of creating a new thread. A new execution environment must first be
created, including address space tables. Anderson et al. [1991] quote a figure of about
11 milliseconds to create a new UNIX process, and about 1 millisecond to create a
thread on the same CVAX processor architecture running the Topaz kernel; in each case
the time measured includes the new entity simply calling a null procedure and then
exiting. These figures are given as a rough guide only.


===== page 314 =====
296 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
When the new entity performs some useful work rather than calling a null
procedure, there are also long-term costs, which are liable to be greater for a new process
than for a new thread within an existing process. In a kernel supporting virtual memory,
the new process will incur page faults as data and instructions are referenced for the first
time; hardware caches will initially contain no data values for the new process, and it
must acquire cache entries as it executes. In the case of thread creation, these long-term
overheads may also occur, but they are liable to be smaller. When the thread accesses
code and data that have recently been accessed by other threads within the process, it
automatically takes advantage of any hardware or main memory caching that has taken
place.
The second performance advantage of threads concerns switching between
threads – that is, running one thread instead of another at a given processor. This cost is
the most important, because it may be incurred many times in the lifetime of a thread.
Switching between threads sharing the same execution environment is considerably
cheaper than switching between threads belonging to different processes. The overheads
associated with thread switching are related to scheduling (choosing the next thread to
run) and context switching.
A processor context comprises the values of the processor registers such as the
program counter, and the current hardware protection domain: the address space and the
processor protection mode (supervisor or user). A context switch is the transition
between contexts that takes place when switching between threads, or when a single
thread makes a system call or takes another type of exception. It involves the following:
(cid:129) the saving of the processor’s original register state, and the loading of the new
state;
(cid:129) in some cases, a transfer to a new protection domain – this is known as a domain
transition.
Switching between threads sharing the same execution environment entirely at user
level involves no domain transition and is relatively cheap. Switching to the kernel, or
toanother thread belonging to the same execution environment via the kernel, involves
a domain transition. The cost is therefore greater but it is still relatively low if the kernel
is mapped into the process’s address space. When switching between threads belonging
to different execution environments, however, there are greater overheads. The box
below explains the expensive implications of hardware caching for these domain
The aliasing problem • Memory management units usually include a hardware
cache to speed up the translation between virtual and physical addresses, called a
translation lookaside buffer (TLB). TLBs, and also virtually addressed data and
instruction caches, suffer in general from the so-called aliasing problem. The same
virtual address can be valid in two different address spaces, but in general it is
supposed to refer to different physical data in the two spaces. Unless their entries are
tagged with a context identifier, TLBs and virtually addressed caches are unaware of
this and so might contain incorrect data. Therefore the TLB and cache contents have
to be flushed on a switch to a different address space. Physically addressed caches do
not suffer from the aliasing problem but using virtual addresses for cache lookups is
a common practice, largely because it allows the lookups to be overlapped with
address translation.


===== page 315 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 297
transitions. Longer-term costs of having to acquire hardware cache entries and main
memory pages are more liable to apply when such a domain transition occurs. Figures
quoted by Anderson et al. [1991] are 1.8 milliseconds for the Topaz kernel to switch
between UNIX processes and 0.4 milliseconds to switch between threads belonging to
the same execution environment. Even lower costs (0.04 milliseconds) are achieved if
threads are switched at user level. These figures are given as a rough guide only; they
do not measure the longer-term caching costs.
In the example above of the client process with two threads, the first thread
generates data and passes it to the second thread, which makes a remote method
invocation or remote procedure call. Since the threads share an address space, there is
no need to use message passing to pass the data. Both threads may access the data via a
common variable. Herein lies both the advantage and the danger of using multi-threaded
processes. The convenience and efficiency of access to shared data is an advantage. This
is particularly so for servers, as the example of caching file data given above showed.
However, threads that share an address space and that are not written in a type-safe
language are not protected from one another. An errant thread can arbitrarily alter data
used by another thread, causing a fault. If protection is required, then either a type-safe
language should be used or it may be preferable to use multiple processes instead of
multiple threads.
Threadsprogramming • Threads programming is concurrent programming, as
traditionally studied in, for example, the field of operating systems. This section refers
to the following concurrent programming concepts, which are explained fully by Bacon
[2002]: race conditions,critical sections (Bacon calls these critical regions), monitors,
condition variables and semaphores.
Much threads programming is done in a conventional language, such as C, that has
been augmented with a threads library. The C Threads package developed for the Mach
operating system is an example of this. More recently, the POSIX Threads standard
IEEE 1003.1c-1995, known as pthreads, has been widely adopted. Boykin et al. [1993]
describe both C Threads and pthreads in the context of Mach.
Some languages provide direct support for threads, including Ada95 [Burns and
Wellings 1998], Modula-3 [Harbison 1992] and Java [Oaks and Wong 1999]. We give
an overview of Java threads here.
Like any threads implementation, Java provides methods for creating threads,
destroying them and synchronizing them. The Java Thread class includes the
constructor and management methods listed in Figure 7.8. The Thread and Object
synchronization methods are in Figure 7.9.
Threadlifetimes • A new thread is created on the same Java virtual machine (JVM) as
its creator, in the SUSPENDED state. After it is made RUNNABLE with the start()
method, it executes the run() method of an object designated in its constructor. The JVM
and the threads on top of it all execute in a process on top of the underlying operating
system. Threads can be assigned a priority, so that a Java implementation that supports
priorities will run a particular thread in preference to any thread with lower priority. A
thread ends its life when it returns from the run() method or when its destroy() method
is called.
Programs can manage threads in groups. Every thread belongs to one group,
which it is assigned at the time of its creation. Thread groups are useful when several


===== page 316 =====
298 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.8 Java thread constructor and management methods
Thread(ThreadGroup group, Runnable target, String name)
Creates a new thread in the SUSPENDED state, which will belong to group and be
identified as name; the thread will execute the run() method of target.
setPriority(int newPriority), getPriority()
Sets and returns the thread’s priority.
run()
A thread executes the run() method of its target object, if it has one, and otherwise its
own run() method (Thread implements Runnable).
start()
Changes the state of the thread from SUSPENDED to RUNNABLE.
sleep(long millisecs)
Causes the thread to enter the SUSPENDED state for the specified time.
yield()
Causes the thread to enter the READY state and invokes the scheduler.
destroy()
Destroys the thread.
applications coexist on the same JVM. One example of their use is security: by default,
a thread in one group cannot perform management operations on a thread in another
group. For example, an application thread cannot mischievously interrupt a system
windowing (AWT) thread.
Thread groups also facilitate control of the relative priorities of threads (on Java
implementations that support priorities). This is useful for browsers running applets and
for web servers running programs called servlets [Hunter and Crawford 1998], which
create dynamic web pages. An unprivileged thread within an applet or servlet can only
create a new thread that belongs to its own group, or to a descendant group created
within it (the exact restrictions depend upon the SecurityManager in place). Browsers
and servers can assign threads belonging to different applets or servlets to different
groups and set the maximum priority of each group as a whole (including descendant
groups). There is no way for an applet or servlet thread to override the group priorities
set by the manager threads, since they cannot be overridden by calls to setPriority().
Threadsynchronization • Programming a multi-threaded process requires great care.
The main difficult issues are the sharing of objects and the techniques used for thread
coordination and cooperation. Each thread’s local variables in methods are private to it
– threads have private stacks. However, threads are not given private copies of static
(class) variables or object instance variables.
Consider, for example, the shared queues that we described earlier in this section,
which I/O threads and worker threads use to transfer requests in some server threading
architectures. Race conditions can in principle arise when threads manipulate data


===== page 317 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 299
Figure 7.9 Java thread synchronization calls
thread.join(long millisecs)
Blocks the calling thread for up to the specified time or until thread has terminated.
thread.interrupt()
Interrupts thread: causes it to return from a blocking method call such as sleep().
object.wait(long millisecs, int nanosecs)
Blocks the calling thread until a call made to notify() or notifyAll() on object wakes
the thread, the thread is interrupted or the specified time has elapsed.
object.notify(), object.notifyAll()
Wakes, respectively, one or all of any threads that have called wait() on object.
structures such as queues concurrently. The queued requests can be lost or duplicated
unless the threads’ pointer manipulations are carefully coordinated.
Java provides the synchronized keyword for programmers to designate the well-
known monitor construct for thread coordination. Programmers designate either entire
methods or arbitrary blocks of code as belonging to a monitor associated with an
individual object. The monitor’s guarantee is that at most one thread can execute within
it at any time. We could serialize the actions of the I/O and worker threads in our
example by designating addTo() and removeFrom() methods in the Queue class as
synchronized methods. All accesses to variables within those methods would then be
carried out in mutual exclusion with respect to invocations of these methods.
Java allows threads to be blocked and woken up via arbitrary objects that act as
condition variables. A thread that needs to block awaiting a certain condition calls an
object’s wait() method. All objects implement this method, since it belongs to Java’s
root Object class. Another thread calls notify() to unblock at most one thread or
notifyAll() to unblock all threads waiting on that object. Both notification methods also
belong to the Object class.
As an example, when a worker thread discovers that there are no requests to
process, it calls wait() on the instance of Queue. When the I/O thread subsequently adds
a request to the queue, it calls the queue’s notify() method to wake up a worker.
The Java synchronization methods are given in Figure 7.9. In addition to the
synchronization primitives that we have mentioned, the join() method blocks the caller
until the target thread’s termination. The interrupt() method is useful for prematurely
waking a waiting thread. All the standard synchronization primitives, such as
semaphores, can be implemented in Java. But care is required, since Java’s monitor
guarantees apply only to an object’s synchronized code; a class may have a mixture of
synchronized and non-synchronized methods. Note also that the monitor implemented
by a Java object has only one implicit condition variable, whereas in general a monitor
may have several condition variables.
Threadscheduling • An important distinction is between preemptive and non-
preemptive scheduling of threads. In preemptive scheduling, a thread may be suspended
at any point to make way for another thread, even when the preempted thread would


===== page 318 =====
300 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
otherwise continue running. In non-preemptive scheduling(sometimes called coroutine
scheduling), a thread runs until it makes acall to the threading system (for example, a
system call), when the system may deschedule it and schedule another thread to run.
The advantage of non-preemptive scheduling is that any section of code that does
not contain a call to the threading system is automatically a critical section. Race
conditions are thus conveniently avoided. On the other hand, non-preemptively
scheduled threads cannot take advantage of a multiprocessor, since they run exclusively.
Care must be taken over long-running sections of code that do not contain calls to the
threading system. The programmer may need to insert special yield() calls, whose sole
function is to enable other threads to be scheduled and make progress. Non-
preemptively scheduled threads are also unsuited to real-time applications, in which
events are associated with absolute times by which they must be processed.
Java does not, by default, support real-time processing, although real-time
implementations exist [www.rtj.org]. For example, multimedia applications that process
data such as voice and video have real-time requirements for both communication and
processing (e.g., filtering and compression) [Govindan and Anderson 1991]. Chapter 20
will examine real-time thread-scheduling requirements. Process control is another
example of a real-time domain. In general, each real-time domain has its own thread-
scheduling requirements. It is therefore sometimes desirable for applications to
implement their own scheduling policies. To consider this, we turn now to the
implementation of threads.
Threadsimplementation • Many kernels provide native support for multi-threaded
processes, including Windows, Linux, Solaris, Mach and Mac OS X. These kernels
provide thread-creation and -management system calls, and they schedule individual
threads. Some other kernels have only a single-threaded process abstraction. Multi-
threaded processes must then be implemented in a library of procedures linked to
application programs. In such cases, the kernel has no knowledge of these user-level
threads and therefore cannot schedule them independently. A threads runtime library
organizes the scheduling of threads. A thread would block the process, and therefore all
threads within it, if it made a blocking system call, so the asynchronous (non-blocking)
I/O facilities of the underlying kernel are exploited. Similarly, the implementation can
utilize the kernel-provided timers and software interrupt facilities to timeslice between
threads.
When no kernel support for multi-threaded processes is provided, a user-level
threads implementation suffers from the following problems:
(cid:129) The threads within a process cannot take advantage of a multiprocessor.
(cid:129) A thread that takes a page fault blocks the entire process and all threads within it.
(cid:129) Threads within different processes cannot be scheduled according to a single
scheme of relative prioritization.
User-level threads implementations, on the other hand, have significant advantages over
kernel-level implementations:
(cid:129) Certain thread operations are significantly less costly. For example, switching
between threads belonging to the same process does not necessarily involve a
system call, which entails a relatively expensive trap to the kernel.


===== page 319 =====
SECTION 7.4 PROCESSES AND THREADS 301
(cid:129) Given that the thread-scheduling module is implemented outside the kernel, it can
be customized or changed to suit particular application requirements. Variations
in scheduling requirements occur largely because of application-specific
considerations such as the real-time nature of multimedia processing.
(cid:129) Many more user-level threads can be supported than could reasonably be provided
by default by a kernel.
It is possible to combine the advantages of user-level and kernel-level threads
implementations. One approach, applied, for example, to the Mach kernel [Black 1990],
is to enable user-level code to provide scheduling hints to the kernel’s thread scheduler.
Another, adopted in the Solaris 2 operating system, is a form of hierarchical scheduling.
Each process creates one or more kernel-level threads, known in Solaris as ‘lightweight
processes’. User-level threads are also supported. A user-level scheduler assigns each
user-level thread to a kernel-level thread. This scheme can take advantage of
multiprocessors, and also benefits because some thread-creation and thread-switching
operations take place at user level. The scheme’s disadvantage is that it still lacks
flexibility: if a thread blocks in the kernel, then all user-level threads assigned to it are
also prevented from running, regardless of whether they are eligible to run.
Several research projects have developed hierarchical scheduling further in order
to provide greater efficiency and flexibility. These include work on so-called scheduler
activations [Anderson et al. 1991], the multimedia work of Govindan and Anderson
[1991], the Psyche multiprocessor operating system [Marsh et al. 1991], the Nemesis
kernel [Leslie et al. 1996] and the SPIN kernel [Bershad et al. 1995]. The insight driving
these designs is that what a user-level scheduler requires from the kernel is not just a set
of kernel-supported threads onto which it can map user-level threads. The user-level
scheduler also requires the kernel to notify it of the events that are relevant to its
scheduling decisions. We describe the scheduler activations design in order to make this
clear.
The FastThreads package of Anderson et al. [1991] is an implementation of a
hierarchic, event-based scheduling system. They consider the main system components
to be a kernel running on a computer with one or more processors, and a set of
application programs running on it. Each application process contains a user-level
scheduler, which manages the threads inside the process. The kernel is responsible for
allocating virtual processors to processes. The number of virtual processors assigned to
a process depends on such factors as the applications’ requirements, their relative
priorities and the total demand on the processors. Figure 7.10(a) shows an example of a
three-processor machine, on which the kernel allocates one virtual processor to process
A, running a relatively low-priority job, and two virtual processors to process B. They
are virtual processors because the kernel can allocate different physical processors to
each process as time goes by, while keeping its guarantee of how many processors it has
allocated.
The number of virtual processors assigned to a process can also vary. Processes
can give back a virtual processor that they no longer need; they can also request extra
virtual processors. For example, if process A has requested an extra virtual processor and
B terminates, then the kernel can assign one to A.


===== page 320 =====
302 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.10 Scheduler activations
P added
Process Process
A B SA preempted
Process SA unblocked
SA blocked
Kernel
P idle
Kernel
Virtual processors
P needed
A. Assignment of virtual processors B. Events between user-level scheduler & kernel
to processes Key: P = processor; SA = scheduler activation
Figure 7.10(b) shows that a process notifies the kernel when either of two types of
event occurs: when a virtual processor is ‘idle’ and no longer needed, or when an extra
virtual processor is required.
Figure 7.10(b) also shows that the kernel notifies the process when any of four
types of event occurs. A scheduler activation (SA) is a call from the kernel to a process,
which notifies the process’s scheduler of an event. Entering a body of code from a lower
layer (the kernel) in this way is sometimes called an upcall. The kernel creates an SA by
loading a physical processor’s registers with a context that causes it to commence
execution of code in the process, at a procedure address designated by the user-level
scheduler. An SA is thus also a unit of allocation of a timeslice on a virtual processor.
The user-level scheduler has the task of assigning its READY threads to the set of SAs
currently executing within it. The number of those SAs is at most the number of virtual
processors that the kernel has assigned to the process.
The four types of event that the kernel notifies the user-level scheduler (which we
shall refer to simply as ‘the scheduler’) of are as follows:
Virtual processor allocated: The kernel has assigned a new virtual processor to the
process, and this is the first timeslice upon it; the scheduler can load the SA with the
context of a READY thread, which can thus recommence execution.
SA blocked: An SA has blocked in the kernel, and the kernel is using a fresh SA to
notify the scheduler; the scheduler sets the state of the corresponding thread to
BLOCKED and can allocate a READY thread to the notifying SA.
SA unblocked: An SA that was blocked in the kernel has become unblocked and is
ready to execute at user level again; the scheduler can now return the corresponding
thread to the READY list. In order to create the notifying SA, the kernel either
allocates a new virtual processor to the process or preempts another SA in the same
process. In the latter case, it also communicates the preemption event to the
scheduler, which can reevaluate its allocation of threads to SAs.


===== page 321 =====
SECTION 7.5 COMMUNICATION AND INVOCATION 303
SA preempted: The kernel has taken away the specified SA from the process
(although it may do this to allocate a processor to a fresh SA in the same process);
the scheduler places the preempted thread in the READY list and reevaluates the
thread allocation.
This hierarchical scheduling scheme is flexible because the process’s user-level
scheduler can allocate threads to SAs in accordance with whatever policies can be built
on top of the low-level events. The kernel always behaves the same way. It has no
influence on the user-level scheduler’s behaviour, but it assists the scheduler through its
event notifications and by providing the register state of blocked and preempted threads.
The scheme is potentially efficient because no user-level thread need stay in the READY
state if there is a virtual processor on which to run it.
7.5 Communication and invocation
Here we concentrate on communication as part of the implementation of what we have
called an invocation – a construct, such as a remote method invocation, remote
procedure call or event notification, whose purpose is to bring about an operation on a
resource in a different address space.
We cover operating system design issues and concepts by asking the following
questions about the OS:
(cid:129) What communication primitives does it supply?
(cid:129) Which protocols does it support and how open is the communication implemen-
tation?
(cid:129) What steps are taken to make communication as efficient as possible?
(cid:129) What support is provided for high-latency and disconnected operation?
We focus on the first two questions here then turn to the final two in Sections 7.5.1 and
7.5.2, respectively.
Communicationprimitives • Some kernels designed for distributed systems have
provided communication primitives tailored to the types of invocation that Chapter 5
described. Amoeba [Tanenbaum et al. 1990], for example, provides doOperation,
getRequest and sendReply as primitives. Amoeba, the V system and Chorus provide
group communication primitives. Placing relatively high-level communication
functionality in the kernel has the advantage of efficiency. If, for example, middleware
provides RMI over UNIX’s connected (TCP) sockets, then a client must make two
communication system calls (socket write and read) for each remote invocation. Over
Amoeba, it would require only a single call to doOperation. The savings in system call
overhead are liable to be even greater with group communication.
In practice, middleware, and not the kernel, provides most high-level
communication facilities found in systems today, including RPC/RMI, event
notification and group communication. Developing such complex software as user-level
code is much simpler than developing it for the kernel. Developers typically implement
middleware over sockets giving access to Internet standard protocols – often connected


===== page 322 =====
304 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
sockets using TCP but sometimes unconnected UDP sockets. The principal reasons for
using sockets are portability and interoperability: middleware is required to operate over
as many widely used operating systems as possible, and all common operating systems,
such as UNIX and the Windows family, provide similar socket APIs giving access to
TCP and UDP protocols.
Despite the widespread use of TCP and UDP sockets provided by common
kernels, research continues to be carried out into lower-cost communication primitives
in experimental kernels. We examine performance issues further in Section 7.5.1.
Protocolsandopenness • One of the main requirements of the operating system is to
provide standard protocols that enable interworking between middleware
implementations on different platforms. Several research kernels developed in the 1980s
incorporated their own network protocols tuned to RPC interactions – notably Amoeba
RPC [van Renesse et al. 1989], VMTP [Cheriton 1986] and Sprite RPC [Ousterhout et
al. 1988]. However, these protocols were not widely used beyond their native research
environments. By contrast, the designers of the Mach 3.0 and Chorus kernels (as well as
L4 [Härtig et al. 1997]) decided to leave the choice of networking protocols entirely
open. These kernels provide message passing between local processes only, and leave
network protocol processing to a server that runs on top of the kernel.
Given the everyday requirement for access to the Internet, compatibility at the
level of TCP and UDP is required of operating systems for all but the smallest of
networked devices. And the operating system is still required to enable middleware to
take advantage of novel low-level protocols. For example, users want to benefit from
wireless technologies such as infrared and radio frequency (RF) transmission,
preferably without having to upgrade their applications. This requires that
corresponding protocols, such as IrDA for infrared networking and Bluetooth or IEEE
802.11 for RF networking, can be integrated.
Protocols are normally arranged in a stack of layers (see Chapter 3). Many
operating systems allow new layers to be integrated statically, by including a layer such
as IrDA as a permanently installed protocol ‘driver’. By contrast, dynamic protocol
composition is a technique whereby a protocol stack can be composed on the fly to meet
the requirements of a particular application, and to utilize whichever physical layers are
available given the platform’s current connectivity. For example, a web browser running
on a notebook computer should be able to take advantage of a wide area wireless link
while the user is on the road, and then a faster Ethernet or IEEE 802.11 connection when
the user is back in the office.
Another example of dynamic protocol composition is use of a customized request-
reply protocol over a wireless networking layer, to reduce round-trip latencies. Standard
TCP implementations have been found to work poorly over wireless networking media
[Balakrishnan et al. 1996], which tend to exhibit higher rates of packet loss than wired
media. In principle, a request-response protocol such as HTTP could be engineered to
work more efficiently between wirelessly connected nodes by using the wireless
transport layer directly, rather than using an intermediate TCP layer.
Support for protocol composition appeared in the design of the UNIX Streams
facility [Ritchie 1984], in Horus [van Renesse et al. 1995] and in the x-kernel
[Hutchinson and Peterson 1991]. A more recent example is the construction of a
configurable transport protocol CTP on top of the Cactus system for dynamic protocol
composition [Bridges et al. 2007].


===== page 323 =====
SECTION 7.5 COMMUNICATION AND INVOCATION 305
7.5.1 Invocation performance
Invocation performance is a critical factor in distributed system design. The more
designers separate functionality between address spaces, the more remote invocations
are required. Clients and servers may make many millions of invocation-related
operations in their lifetimes, so small fractions of milliseconds count in invocation costs.
Network technologies continue to improve, but invocation times have not decreased in
proportion with increases in network bandwidth. This section will explain how software
overheads often predominate over network overheads in invocation times – at least, for
the case of a LAN or intranet. This is in contrast to a remote invocation over the Internet
– for example, fetching a web resource. On the Internet, network latencies are highly
variable and relatively high on average; throughput may be relatively low, and server
load often predominates over per-request processing costs. For an example of latencies,
Bridges et al. [2007] report minimal UDP message round-trips taking average times of
about 400 milliseconds over the Internet between two computers connected across US
geographical regions, as opposed to about 0.1 milliseconds when identical computers
were connected over a single Ethernet.
RPC and RMI implementations have been the subject of study because of the
widespread acceptance of these mechanisms for general-purpose client-server
processing. Much of the research has been carried out into invocations over the network,
and particularly into how invocation mechanisms can take advantage of high-
performance networks [Hutchinson et al. 1989, van Renesse et al. 1989, Schroeder and
Burrows 1990, Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1993, von Eicken et al. 1995, Gokhale and
Schmidt 1996]. There is also, as we shall show, an important special case of RPCs
between processes hosted at the same computer [Bershad et al. 1990, 1991].
Invocationcosts • Calling a conventional procedure or invoking a conventional
method, making a system call, sending a message, remote procedure calling and remote
method invocation are all examples of invocation mechanisms. Each mechanism causes
code to be executed outside the scope of the calling procedure or object. Each involves,
in general, the communication of arguments to this code and the return of data values to
the caller. Invocation mechanisms can be either synchronous, as for example in the case
of conventional and remote procedure calls, or asynchronous.
The important performance-related distinctions between invocation mechanisms,
apart from whether or not they are synchronous, are whether they involve a domain
transition (that is, whether they cross an address space), whether they involve
communication across a network and whether they involve thread scheduling and
switching. Figure 7.11 shows the particular cases of a system call, a remote invocation
between processes hosted at the same computer, and a remote invocation between
processes at different nodes in the distributed system.
Invocationoverthenetwork • A null RPC (and similarly, a null RMI) is defined as an
RPC without parameters that executes a null procedure and returns no values. Its
execution involves an exchange of messages carrying some system data but no user data.
The time taken by a null RPC between user processes connected by a LAN is on the
order of a tenth of a millisecond (see, for example, measurements by Bridges et al.
[2007] of round-trip UDP times using two 2.2GHz Pentium 3 Xeon PCs across a 100
megabits/second Ethernet). By comparison, a null conventional procedure call takes a


===== page 324 =====
306 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.11 Invocations between address spaces
(a) System call
Thread Control transfer via
trap instruction
Control transfer via
privileged instructions
User Kernel
Protection domain
(b) RPC/RMI (within one computer) boundary
Thread 1 Thread 2
User 1 Kernel User 2
(c) RPC/RMI (between computers)
Thread 1 Network Thread 2
User 1 User 2
Kernel 1 Kernel 2
small fraction of a microsecond. Approximately 100 bytes in total are passed across the
network for a null RPC. With a raw bandwidth of 100 megabits/second, the total
network transfer time for this amount of data is about 0.01 milliseconds. Clearly, much
of the observed delay – the total RPC call time experienced by a client – has to be
accounted for by the actions of the operating system kernel and user-level RPC runtime
code.
Null invocation (RPC, RMI) costs are important because they measure a fixed
overhead, the latency. Invocation costs increase with the sizes of arguments and results,
but in many cases the latency is significant compared with the remainder of the delay.
Consider an RPC that fetches a specified amount of data from a server. It has one
integer request argument, specifying how much data to return. It has two reply
arguments, an integer specifying success or failure (the client might have given an
invalid size) and, when the call is successful, an array of bytes from the server.


===== page 325 =====
SECTION 7.5 COMMUNICATION AND INVOCATION 307
Figure 7.12 RPC delay against parameter size
RPC delay
Requested data
size (bytes)
0 1000 2000
Packet
size
Figure 7.12 shows, schematically, client delay against requested data size. The
delay is roughly proportional to the size until the size reaches a threshold at about
network packet size. Beyond that threshold, at least one extra packet has to be sent, to
carry the extra data. Depending on the protocol, a further packet might be used to
acknowledge this extra packet. Jumps in the graph occur each time the number of
packets increases.
Delay is not the only figure of interest for an RPC implementation: RPC
throughput (or bandwidth) is also of concern when data has to be transferred in bulk.
This is the rate of data transfer between computers in a single RPC. If we examine Figure
7.12, we can see that the throughput is relatively low for small amounts of data, when
the fixed processing overheads predominate. As the amount of data is increased, the
throughput rises as those overheads become less significant.
Recall that the steps in an RPC are as follows (RMI involves similar steps):
(cid:129) A client stub marshals the call arguments into a message, sends the request
message and receives and unmarshals the reply.
(cid:129) At the server, a worker thread receives the incoming request, or an I/O thread
receives the request and passes it to a worker thread; in either case, the worker
calls the appropriate server stub.
(cid:129) The server stub unmarshals the request message, calls the designated procedure,
and marshals and sends the reply.
The following are the main components accounting for remote invocation delay, besides
network transmission times:
Marshalling: Marshalling and unmarshalling, which involve copying and converting
data, create a significant overhead as the amount of data grows.


===== page 326 =====
308 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Data copying: Potentially, even after marshalling, message data is copied several
times in the course of an RPC:
1. across the user–kernel boundary, between the client or server address space and
kernel buffers;
2. across each protocol layer (for example, RPC/UDP/IP/Ethernet);
3. between the network interface and kernel buffers.
Transfers between the network interface and main memory are usually handled by
direct memory access (DMA). The processor handles the other copies.
Packet initialization: This involves initializing protocol headers and trailers,
including checksums. The cost is therefore proportional, in part, to the amount of data
sent.
Thread scheduling and context switching: These may occur as follows:
1. Several system calls (that is, context switches) are made during an RPC, as
stubs invoke the kernel’s communication operations.
2. One or more server threads is scheduled.
3. If the operating system employs a separate network manager process, then each
Send involves a context switch to one of its threads.
Waiting for acknowledgements: The choice of RPC protocol may influence delay,
particularly when large amounts of data are sent.
Careful design of the operating system can help reduce some of these costs. The case
study of the Firefly RPC design available at www.cdk5.net/oss shows some of these in
detail, as well as techniques that are applicable within the middleware implementation.
We have already shown how appropriate operating system support for threads can
help reduce multi-threading overheads. The operating system can also have an impact
in reducing memory-copying overheads through memory-sharing facilities.
Memorysharing • Shared regions (introduced in Section 7.4) may be used for rapid
communication between a user process and the kernel, or between user processes. Data
is communicated by writing to and reading from the shared region. Data is thus passed
efficiently, without being copied to and from the kernel’s address space. But system
calls and software interrupts may be required for synchronization, such as when the user
process has written data that should be transmitted, or when the kernel has written data
for the user process to consume. Of course, a shared region is only justified if it is used
sufficiently to offset the initial cost of setting it up.
Even with shared regions, the kernel still has to copy data from the buffers to the
network interface. The U-Net architecture [von Eicken et al. 1995] even allows user-
level code to have direct access to the network interface itself, so that user-level code
can transfer the data to the network without any copying.
Choiceofprotocol • The delay that a client experiences during request-reply interac-
tions over TCP is not necessarily worse than for UDP and in fact is sometimes better,
particularly for large messages. However, care is required when implementing request-
reply interactions on top of a protocol such as TCP, which was not specifically designed


===== page 327 =====
SECTION 7.5 COMMUNICATION AND INVOCATION 309
for this purpose. In particular, TCP’s buffering behaviour can hinder good performance,
and its connection overheads put it at a disadvantage compared with UDP, unless
enough requests are made over a single connection to render the overhead per request
negligible.
The connection overheads of TCP are particularly evident in web invocations.
HTTP 1.0, now relatively little-used, makes a separate TCP connection for every
invocation. Client browsers are delayed while the connection is made. Furthermore,
TCP’s slow-start algorithm has the effect of delaying the transfer of HTTP data
unnecessarily in many cases. The slow-start algorithm operates pessimistically in the
face of possible network congestion by allowing only a small window of data to be sent
at first, before an acknowledgement is received. Nielsen et al. [1997] discuss how HTTP
1.1, now widely used instead of HTTP 1.0, makes use of so-called persistent
connections, which last over the course of several invocations. The initial connection
costs are thus amortized, as long as several invocations are made to the same web server.
This is likely, as users often fetch several pages from the same site, each containing
several images.
Nielsen et al. alsofound that overriding the operating system’s default buffering
behaviour could have a significant impact on the invocation delay. It is often beneficial
to collect several small messages and then send them together, rather than sending them
in separate packets, because of the per-packet latency that we described above. For this
reason, the OS does not necessarily dispatch data over the network immediately after the
corresponding socket write() call. The default OS behaviour is to wait until its buffer is
full or to use a timeout as the criterion for dispatching the data over the network, in the
hope that more data will arrive.
Nielsen et al. found that in the case of HTTP 1.1 the default operating system
buffering behaviour could cause significant unnecessary delays because of the timeouts.
To remove these delays, they altered the kernel’s TCP settings and forced network
dispatch on HTTP request boundaries. This is a good example of how an operating
system can help or hinder middleware because of the policies it implements.
Invocationwithinacomputer • Bershad et al. [1990] report a study that showed that, in
the installation examined, most cross-address-space invocation took place within a
computer and not, as might be expected in a client-server installation, between
computers. The trend towards placing service functionality inside user-level servers
means that more and more invocations will be to a local process. This is especially so as
caching is pursued aggressively if the data needed by a client is liable to be held in a local
server. The cost of an RPC within a computer is growing in importance as a system
performance parameter. These considerations suggest that this local case should be
optimized.
Figure 7.11 suggests that a cross-address-space invocation is implemented within
a computer exactly as it is between computers, except that the underlying message
passing happens to be local. Indeed, this has often been the model implemented. Bershad
et al. developed a more efficient invocation mechanism for the case of two processes on
the same machine called lightweight RPC (LRPC). The LRPC design is based on
optimizations concerning data copying and thread scheduling.
First, they noted that it would be more efficient to use shared memory regions for
client-server communication, with a different (private) region between the server and


===== page 328 =====
310 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.13 A lightweight remote procedure call
Client Server
A stack
A
1. Copy args 4. Execute procedure
and copy results
User stub stub
Kernel
2. Trap to kernel 3. Upcall 5. Return (trap)
each of its local clients. Such a region contains one or more A (for argument) stacks (see
Figure 7.13). Instead of RPC parameters being copied between the kernel and user
address spaces involved, the client and server are able to pass arguments and return
values directly via an A stack. The same stack is used by the client and server stubs. In
LRPC, arguments are copied once: when they are marshalled onto the A stack. In an
equivalent RPC, they are copied four times: from the client stub’s stack onto a message;
from the message to a kernel buffer, from the kernel buffer to a server message, and from
the message to the server stub’s stack. There may be several A stacks in a shared region,
because several threads in the same client may call the server at the same time.
Bershadet al. also considered the cost of thread scheduling. Compare the model
of system call and remote procedure calls in Figure 7.11. When a system call occurs,
most kernels do not schedule a new thread to handle the call but instead perform a
context switch on the calling thread so that it handles the system call. In an RPC, a
remote procedure may exist in a different computer from the client thread, so a different
thread must be scheduled to execute it. In the local case, however, it may be more
efficient for the client thread – which would otherwise be BLOCKED – to call the
invoked procedure in the server’s address space.
A server must be programmed differently in this case to the way we have
described servers before. Instead of setting up one or more threads, which then listen on
ports for invocation requests, the server exports a set of procedures that it is prepared to
have called. Threads in local processes may enter the server’s execution environment as
long as they start by calling one of the server’s exported procedures. A client needing to
invoke a server’s operations must first bind to the server interface (not shown in the
figure). It does this via the kernel, which notifies the server; when the server has
responded to the kernel with a list of allowed procedure addresses, the kernel replies to
the client with a capability for invoking the server’s operations.
An invocation is shown in Figure 7.13. A client thread enters the server’s
execution environment by first trapping to the kernel and presentingit with a capability.


===== page 329 =====
SECTION 7.5 COMMUNICATION AND INVOCATION 311
The kernel checks this and only allows a context switch to a valid server procedure; if it
is valid, the kernel switches the thread’s context to call the procedure in the server’s
execution environment. When the procedure in the server returns, the thread returns to
the kernel, which switches the thread back to the client execution environment. Note that
clients and servers employ stub procedures to hide the details just described from
application writers.
DiscussionofLRPC • There is little doubt that LRPC is more efficient than RPC for the
local case, as long as enough invocations take place to offset the memory management
costs. Bershad et al. [1990] record LRPC delays a factor of three smaller than those of
RPCs executed locally.
Location transparency is not sacrificed in Bershad’s implementation. A client stub
examines a bit set at bind time that records whether the server is local or remote, and
proceeds to use LRPC or RPC, respectively. The application is unaware of which is
used. However, migration transparency might be hard to achieve when a resource is
transferred from a local server to a remote server or vice versa, because of the need to
change invocation mechanisms.
In later work, Bershad et al. [1991] describe several performance improvements,
which are addressed particularly to multiprocessor operation. The improvements largely
concern avoiding traps to the kernel and scheduling processors in such a way as to avoid
unnecessary domain transitions. For example, if a processor is idling in the server’s
memory management context at the time a client thread attempts to invoke a server
procedure, then the thread should be transferred to that processor. This avoids a domain
transition; at the same time, the client’s processor may be reused by another thread in
the client. These enhancements involve an implementation of two-level (user and
kernel) thread scheduling, as described in Section 7.4.
7.5.2 Asynchronous operation
We have discussed how the operating system can help the middleware layer to provide
efficient remote invocation mechanisms. But in the Internet environment the effects of
relatively high latencies, low throughput and high server loads may outweigh any
benefits that the OS can provide. We can add to this the phenomena of network
disconnection and reconnection, which can be regarded as causing extremely high-
latency communication. Users’ mobile computers are not connected to the network all
the time. Even if they have wide area wireless access (for example, using cellular
communication), they may be peremptorily disconnected when, for example, their train
enters a tunnel.
A common technique to defeat high latencies is asynchronous operation, which
arises in two programming models: concurrent invocations and asynchronous
invocations. These models are largely in the domain of middleware rather than operating
system kernel design, but it is useful to consider them here, while we are examining the
topic of invocation performance.
Makinginvocationsconcurrently • In the first model, the middleware provides only
blocking invocations, but the application spawns multiple threads to perform blocking
invocations concurrently.


===== page 330 =====
312 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.14 Times for serialized and concurrent invocations
Serialized invocations Concurrent invocations
process args process args
marshal marshal
Send transmission Send
process args
marshal
Receive Send Receive
unmarshal unmarshal
execute request execute request
marshal marshal
Send Send
Receive
unmarshal
Receive Receive execute request
unmarshal unmarshal marshal
process results process results Send
process args
marshal
Send Receive
unmarshal
process results
Receive time
unmarshal
execute request
marshal
Send
Receive
unmarshal
process results
Client Server Client Server
A good example of such an application is a web browser. A web page typically
contains several images and may contain many. The browser does not need to obtain the
images in a particular sequence, so it makes several concurrent requests at a time. That
way, the time taken to complete all the image requests is typically lower than the delay
that would result from making the requests serially. Not only is the total communication
delay less, in general, but the browser can overlap computation such as image rendering
with communication.
Figure 7.14 shows the potential benefits of interleaving invocations (such as
HTTP requests) between a client and a single server on a single-processor machine. In
the serialized case, the client marshals the arguments, calls theSend operation and then
waits until the reply from the server arrives – whereupon it Receives, unmarshals and
then processes the results. After this it can make the second invocation.
In the concurrent case, the first client thread marshals the arguments and calls the
Send operation. The second thread then immediately makes the second invocation. Each
thread waits to receive its results. The total time taken is liable to be lower than in the
serialized case, as the figure shows. Similar benefits apply if the client threads make


===== page 331 =====
SECTION 7.5 COMMUNICATION AND INVOCATION 313
concurrent requests to several servers, and if the client executes on a multiprocessor
even greater throughput is potentially possible, since the two threads’ processing can
also be overlapped.
Returning to the particular case of HTTP, the study by Nielsen et al. [1997] that
we referred to above also measured the effects of concurrently interleaved HTTP 1.1
invocations (which they call pipelining) over persistent connections. They found that
pipelining reduced network traffic and could lead to performance benefits for clients, as
long as the operating system provides a suitable interface for flushing buffers, to
override the default TCP behaviour.
Asynchronousinvocations • An asynchronous invocation is one that is performed
asynchronously with respect to the caller. That is, it is made with a non-blocking call,
which returns as soon as the invocation request message has been created and is ready
for dispatch.
Sometimes the client does not require any response (except perhaps an indication
of failure if the target host could not be reached). For example, CORBA oneway
invocations have maybe semantics. Otherwise, the client uses a separate call to collect
the results of the invocation. For example, the Mercury communication system [Liskov
and Shrira 1988] supports asynchronous invocations. An asynchronous operation
returns an object called a promise. Eventually, when the invocation succeeds or is
deemed to have failed, the Mercury system places the status and any return values in the
promise. The caller uses the claim operation to obtain the results from the promise. The
claim operation blocks until the promise is ready, whereupon it returns the results or
exceptions from the call. The ready operation is available for testing a promise without
blocking – it returns true or false according to whether the promise is ready or blocked.
Persistentasynchronousinvocations • Traditional asynchronous invocation mecha-
nisms such as Mercury invocations and CORBA oneway invocations are implemented
upon TCP streams and fail if a stream breaks – that is, if the network link is down or the
target host crashes.
But a more developed form of the asynchronous invocation model, which we shall
call persistent asynchronous invocation, is becoming increasingly relevant because of
disconnected operation. This model is similar to Mercury in terms of the programming
operations it provides, but the difference is in its failure semantics. A conventional
invocation mechanism (synchronous or asynchronous) is designed to fail after a given
number of timeouts have occurred, but these short-term timeouts are often not
appropriate where disconnections or very high latencies occur.
A system for persistent asynchronous invocation tries indefinitely to perform the
invocation, until it is known to have succeeded or failed, or until the application cancels
the invocation. An example is Queued RPC (QRPC) in the Rover toolkit for mobile
information access [Joseph et al. 1997].
As its name suggests, QRPC queues outgoing invocation requests in a stable log
while there is no network connection and schedules their dispatch over the network to
servers when there is a connection. Similarly, it queues invocation results from servers
in what we can consider to be the client’s invocation ‘mailbox’ until the client re-
connects and collects them. Requests and results may be compressed when they are
queued, before their transmission over a low-bandwidth network.


===== page 332 =====
314 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
QRPC can take advantage of different communication links for sending an
invocation request and receiving the reply. For example, a request could be dispatched
over a cellular data link while the user is on the road, and then the response delivered
over an Ethernet link when the user connects her device to the corporate intranet. In
principle, the invocation system can even store the invocation results near to the user’s
next expected point of connection.
The client’s network scheduler operates according to various criteria and does not
necessarily dispatch invocations in FIFO order. Applications can assign priorities to
individual invocations. When a connection becomes available, QRPC evaluates its
bandwidth and the expense of using it. It dispatches high-priority invocation requests
first, and may not dispatch all of them if the link is slow and expensive (such as a wide
area wireless connection), assuming that a faster, cheaper link such as an Ethernet will
become available eventually. Similarly, QRPC takes priority into account when fetching
invocation results from the mailbox over a low-bandwidth link.
Programming with an asynchronous invocation system (persistent or otherwise)
raises the issue of how users can continue using the applications on their client device
while the results of invocations are still not known. For example, the user may wonder
whether they have succeeded in updating a paragraph in a shared document, or if
someone else has made a conflicting update, such as deleting the paragraph. Chapter 18
examines this issue.
7.6 Operating system architecture
In this section, we examine the architecture of a kernel suitable for a distributed system.
We adopt a first-principles approach of starting with the requirement of openness and
examining the major kernel architectures that have been proposed, with this in mind.
An open distributed system should make it possible to:
(cid:129) run only that system software at each computer that is necessary for it to carry out
its particular role in the system architecture – system software requirements can
vary between, for example, mobile phones and server computers, and loading
redundant modules wastes memory resources;
(cid:129) allow the software (and the computer) implementing any particular service to be
changed independently of other facilities;
(cid:129) allow for alternatives of the same service to be provided, when this is required to
suit different users or applications;
(cid:129) introduce new services without harming the integrity of existing ones.
The separation of fixed resource management mechanisms from resource management
policies, which vary from application to application and service to service, has been a
guiding principle in operating system design for a long time [Wulf et al. 1974]. For
example, we said that an ideal scheduling system would provide mechanisms that enable
a multimedia application such as video conferencing to meet its real-time demands
while coexisting with a non-real-time application such as web browsing.


===== page 333 =====
SECTION 7.6 OPERATING SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 315
Figure 7.15 Monolithic kernel and microkernel
S4 .......
S1 S2 S3 S4 .......
.......
S1 S2 S3
Monolithic kernel Microkernel
Key:
Server: Kernel code and data: Dynamically loaded server program:
Ideally, the kernel would provide only the most basic mechanisms upon which the
general resource management tasks at a node are carried out. Server modules would be
dynamically loaded as required, to implement the required resource management
policies for the currently running applications.
Monolithickernelsandmicrokernels • There are two key examples of kernel design: the
so-calledmonolithic and microkernel approaches. These designs differ primarily in the
decision as to what functionality belongs in the kernel and what is to be left to server
processes that can be dynamically loaded to run on top of it. Although microkernels have
not been deployed widely, it is instructive to understand their advantages and
disadvantages compared with the typical kernels found today.
The UNIX operating system kernel has been called monolithic (see definition in
the box below). This term is meant to suggest that it is massive – it performs all basic
operating system functions and takes up in the order of megabytes of code and data –
and that it is undifferentiated, i.e. it is coded in a non-modular way. The result is that to
a large extent it is intractable: altering any individual software component to adapt it to
changing requirements is difficult. Another example of a monolithic kernel is that of the
Sprite network operating system [Ousterhout et al. 1988]. A monolithic kernel can
contain some server processes that execute within its address space, including file
servers and some networking. The code that these processes execute is part of the
standard kernel configuration (see Figure 7.15).
By contrast, in the case of a microkernel design the kernel provides only the most
basic abstractions, principally address spaces, threads and local interprocess
communication;all other system services are provided by servers that are dynamically
loaded at precisely those computers in the distributed system that require them (Figure
7.15). Clients access these system services using the kernel’s message-based invocation
mechanisms.
Monolithic • The Chambers 20th Century Dictionary gives the following definition
of monolith and monolithic. monolith, n. a pillar, or column, of a single stone:
anything resembling a monolith in uniformity, massiveness or intractability. – adj.
monolithic pertaining to or resembling a monolith: of a state, an organization, etc.,
massive, and undifferentiated throughout: intractable for this reason.


===== page 334 =====
316 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.16 The role of the microkernel
Middleware
Language Language OS emulation
support support subsystem
....
subsystem A subsystem B
Microkernel
Hardware
The microkernel supports middleware via subsystems
We said above that users are liable to reject operating systems that do not run their
applications. But in addition to extensibility, microkernel designers have another goal:
the binary emulation of standard operating systems such as UNIX [Armand et al. 1989,
Golub et al. 1990, Härtig et al. 1997].
The place of the microkernel – in its most general form – in the overall distributed
system design is shown in Figure 7.16. The microkernel appears as a layer between the
hardware layer and a layer consisting of major system components called subsystems. If
performance is the main goal, rather than portability, then middleware may use the
facilities of the microkernel directly. Otherwise, it uses a language runtime support
subsystem, or a higher-level operating system interface provided by an operating system
emulation subsystem. Each of these, in turn, is implemented by a combination of library
procedures linked into applications and a set of servers running on top of the
microkernel.
There can be more than one system call interface – more than one ‘operating
system’ – presented to the programmer on the same underlying platform. An example is
the implementation of UNIX and OS/2 on top of the Mach distributed operating system
kernel. Note that operating system emulation is different from machine virtualization
(see Section 7.7).
Comparison • The chief advantages of a microkernel-based operating system are its
extensibility and its ability to enforce modularity behind memory protection boundaries.
In addition, a relatively small kernel is more likely to be free of bugs than one that is
larger and more complex.
The advantage of a monolithic design is the relative efficiency with which
operations can be invoked. System calls may be more expensive than conventional
procedures, but even using the techniques we examined in the previous section, an
invocation to a separate user-level address space on the same node is more costly still.
The lack of structure in monolithic designs can be avoided by the use of software
engineering techniques such as layering, used in MULTICS [Organick 1972], or object-
oriented design, used for example in Choices [Campbell et al. 1993]. Windows employs
a combination of both [Custer 1998]. But Windows remains ‘massive’, and the majority
of its functionality is not designed to be routinely replaceable. Even a modularized large


===== page 335 =====
SECTION 7.6 OPERATING SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 317
kernel can be hard to maintain, and it provides limited support for an open distributed
system. As long as modules are executed within the same address space, using a
language such as C or C++ that compiles to efficient code but permits arbitrary data
accesses, it is possible for strict modularity to be broken by programmers seeking
efficient implementations, and for a bug in one module to corrupt the data in another.
Somehybridapproaches • Two of the original microkernels, Mach [Acetta et al. 1986]
and Chorus [Rozier et al. 1990], began their developmental life running servers only as
user processes. In this configuration, modularity is hardware-enforced through address
spaces. Where servers require direct access to hardware, special system calls can be
provided for these privileged processes, which map device registers and buffers into
their address spaces. The kernel turns interrupts into messages, which enables user-level
servers to handle interrupts.
Because of performance problems, the Chorus and Mach microkernel designs
eventually changed to allow servers to be loaded dynamically either into the kernel
address space or into a user-level address space. In each case, clients interact with
servers using the same interprocess communication calls. A developer can thus debug a
server at user level and then, when the development is deemed complete, allow the
server to run inside the kernel’s address space in order to optimize system performance.
But such a server then threatens the integrity of the system, should it turn out still to
contain bugs.
The SPIN operating system design [Bershad et al. 1995] finesses the problem of
trading off efficiency for protection by employing language facilities for protection. The
kernel and all dynamically loaded modules grafted onto the kernel execute within a
single address space. But all are written in a type-safe language (Modula-3), so they can
be mutually protected. Protection domains within the kernel address space are
established using protected name spaces. No module grafted onto the kernel may access
a resource unless it has been handed a reference for it, and Modula-3 enforces the rule
that a reference can only be used to perform operations allowed by the programmer.
In an attempt to minimize the dependencies between system modules, the SPIN
designers chose an event-based model as a mechanism for interaction between modules
grafted into the kernel’s address space (see Section 6.3 for a discussion of event-based
programming). The system defines a set of core events, such as network packet arrival,
timer interrupts, page fault occurrences and thread state changes. System components
operate by registering themselves as handlers for the events that affect them. For
example, a scheduler would register itself to handle events similar to those we studied
in the scheduler activations system in Section 7.4.
Operating systems such as Nemesis [Leslie et al. 1996] exploit the fact that, even
at the hardware level, an address space is not necessarily also a single protection domain.
The kernel coexists in a single address space with all dynamically loaded system
modules and all applications. When it loads an application, the kernel places the
application’s code and data in regions chosen from those that are available at runtime.
The advent of processors with 64-bit addressing has made single-address-space
operating systems particularly attractive, since they support very large address spaces
that can accommodate many applications.
The kernel of a single-address-space operating system sets the protection
attributes on individual regions within the address space to restrict access by user-level


===== page 336 =====
318 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
code. User-level code still runs with the processor in a particular protection context
(determined by settings in the processor and memory management unit), which gives it
full access to its own regions and only selectively shared access to others. The saving of
a single address space, compared with using multiple address spaces, is that the kernel
need never flush any caches when it implements a domain transition.
Some later kernel designs, such as L4 [Härtig et al. 1997] and the Exokernel
[Kaashoek et al. 1997], take the approach that what we have described as ‘microkernels’
still contain too much policy as opposed to mechanism. L4 is a ‘second-generation’
microkernel design that forces dynamically loaded system modules to execute in user-
level address spaces, but optimizes interprocess communication to offset the costs of
doing so. It offloads much of the kernel’s complexity by delegating the management of
address spaces to user-level servers. The Exokernel takes a quite different approach,
employing user-level libraries instead of user-level servers to supply functional
extensions. It provides protected allocation of extremely low-level resources such as
disk blocks, and it expects all other resource management functionality – even a file
system – to be linked into applications as libraries.
In the words of one microkernel designer [Liedtke 1996], ‘the microkernel story
is full of good ideas and blind alleys’. As we shall see in the next section, the need to
support multiple subsystems and also enforce protection between these subsystems is
now met by the concept of virtualization which has replaced microkernel approaches as
the key innovation in operating system design.
7.7 Virtualization at the operating system level
Virtualization is an important concept in distributed systems. We have already seen one
application of virtualization in the context of networking, in the form of overlay
networks (see Section 4.5) offering support for particular classes of distributed
application. Virtualization is also applied in the context of operating systems; indeed, it
is in this context that virtualization has had the most impact. In this section, we examine
what it means to apply virtualization at the operating system level (system
virtualization) and also present a case study of Xen, a leading example of system-level
virtualization.
7.7.1 System virtualization
The goal of system virtualization is to provide multiple virtual machines (virtual
hardware images) over the underlying physical machine architecture, with each virtual
machine running a separate operating system instance. The concept stems from the
observation that modern computer architectures have the necessary performance to
support potentially large numbers of virtual machines and multiplex resources between
them. Multiple instances of the same operating system can run on the virtual machines
or a range of different operating systems can be supported. The virtualization system
allocates the physical processor(s) and other resources of a physical machine between
all virtual machines that it supports.


===== page 337 =====
SECTION 7.7 VIRTUALIZATION AT THE OPERATING SYSTEM LEVEL 319
Historically, processes were used to share the processor and other resources
between multiple tasks running on behalf of one or several users. System virtualization
has emerged more recently and is now commonly used for this purpose. It offers benefits
for security and clean separation of tasks and in allocating and charging each user for
their use of resources more precisely than can be achieved with processes running in a
single system.
To fully understand the motivation for virtualization at the operating system level,
it is useful to consider different use cases of the technology:
(cid:129) On server machines, an organization assigns each service it offers to a virtual
machine and then optimally allocates the virtual machines to physical servers.
Unlike processes, virtual machines can be migrated quite simply to other physical
machines, adding flexibility in managing the server infrastructure. This approach
has the potential to reduce investment in server computers and to reduce energy
consumption, a key issue for large server farms.
(cid:129) Virtualization is very relevant to the provision of cloud computing. As described
in Chapter 1, cloud computing adopts a model where storage, computation and
higher-level objects built over them are offered as a service. The services offered
range from low-level aspects such as physical infrastructure (referred to as
infrastructure as a service), through software platforms such as the Google App
Engine, featured in Chapter 21, (platform as a service), to arbitrary application-
level services (software as a service). Indeed, the first is enabled directly by
virtualization, allowing users of the cloud to be provided with one or more virtual
machines for their own use.
(cid:129) The developers of virtualization solutions are also motivated by the need for
distributed applications to create and destroy virtual machines readily and with
little overhead. This is required in applications that may need to demand resources
dynamically, such as multiplayer online games or distributed multimedia
applications, as featured in Chapter 1 [Whitaker et al. 2002]. Support for such
applications can be enhanced by adopting appropriate resource allocation policies
to meet quality of service requirements of virtual machines.
(cid:129) A quite different case arises in providing convenient access to several different
operating system environments on a single desktop computer. Virtualization can
be used to provide multiple operating system types on one physical architecture.
For example, on a Macintosh OS X computer, the Parallels Desktop virtual
machine monitor enables a Windows or a Linux system to be installed and to
coexist with OS X, sharing the underlying physical resources.
System virtualization is implemented by a thin layer of software on top of the underlying
physical machine architecture; this layer is referred to as a virtual machine monitor or
hypervisor. This virtual machine monitor provides an interface based closely on the
underlying physical architecture. More precisely, in full virtualization the virtual
machine monitor offers an identical interface to the underlying physical architecture.
This has the advantage that existing operating systems can run transparently and
unmodified on the virtual machine monitor. Experience has shown, however, that full
virtualization can be hard to realize with satisfactory performance on many computer
architectures, including the x86 family of processors, and that performance may be


===== page 338 =====
320 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
improved by allowing a modified interface to be provided (with the drawback that
operating systems then need to be ported to this modified interface). This technique is
known as paravirtualization and is considered in more detail in the case study below.
Note that virtualization is quite distinct from the microkernel approach as
discussed in Section 7.6. Although microkernels support the co-existence of multiple
operating systems, this is achieved by emulating the operating system on top of the re-
usable building blocks offered by the microkernel. In contrast, in operating system
virtualization, an operating system is run directly (or with minor modifications) on the
virtualized hardware. The key advantage of virtualization and the principal reason for its
predominance over microkernels is that applications can run in virtualized environments
without being rewritten or recompiled.
Virtualization began with the IBM 370 architecture, whose VM operating system
can present several complete virtual machines to different programs running at the same
computer. The technique can therefore be traced back to the 1970s. More recently, there
has been an explosion in interest in virtualization, with a number of research projects and
commercial systems providing virtualization solutions for commodity PCs, servers and
cloud infrastructure. Examples of leading virtualization solutions include Xen [Barham
et al. 2003a], Denali [Whitaker et al. 2002], VMWare, Parallels and Microsoft Virtual
Server. We present a case study of the Xen approach below.
7.7.2 Case study: The Xen approach to system virtualization
Xen is a leading example of system virtualization, initially developed as part of the
Xenoserver project at the Computer Laboratory, Cambridge University and now
maintained by an open source community [www.xen.org]. An associated company,
XenSource, was acquired by Citrix Systems in 2007 and Citrix now offers enterprise
solutions based on Xen technology, including XenoServer and associated management
and automation tools. The description of Xen provided below is based on the paper by
Barhamet al. [2003a] and associated XenoServer internal reports [Barham et al. 2003b,
Fraser et al. 2003], together with an excellent and comprehensive book about the
internals of the Xen hypervisor [Chisnall 2007].
The overall goal of the XenoServer project [Fraser et al. 2003] is to provide a
public infrastructure for wide area distributed computing. As such, this is an early
example of cloud computing focussing on infrastructure as a service. In the XenoServer
vision, the world is populated by XenoServers that are capable of executing code on
behalf of customers who are then billed for the resources they use.
The two main outputs of the project are the Xen virtual machine monitor and the
XenoServer Open Platform discussed in more detail below.
The Xen virtual machine monitor • Xen is a virtual machine monitor that was designed
initially to support the implementation of XenoServers but has since evolved into a
standalone solution to system virtualization. The goal of Xen is to enable multiple
operating system instances to run in complete isolation on conventional hardware with
minimal performance overhead introduced by the associated virtualization. Xen is
designed to scale to very large numbers of operating system instances (up to several
hundred virtual machines on a single machine) and deal with heterogeneity, seeking to
support most major operating systems, including Windows, Linux, Solaris and NetBSD.


===== page 339 =====
EXERCISES 321
Figure 7.17 The architecture of Xen
Domain0 DomainU
Control
User User
plane
software software
software
. . .
Guest OS Guest OS Guest OS
(XenoLinux) (XenoBSD) (XenoLinux)
Device drivers Device drivers Device drivers
Domain0 Xen
control Virtual Scheduling Virtual . . . hypervisor
interface x86 CPU memory
Underlying physical hardware (for example x86 machine)
Xen also runs on a variety of hardware platforms including 32- and 64-bit x86
architectures and also PowerPC and IA64 CPUs.
The architecture of Xen: The overall architecture of Xen is captured in Figure 7.17. The
Xen virtual machine monitor (known as the hypervisor) is central to this architecture,
supporting the virtualization of the underlying physical resources, specifically the CPU
and its instruction set, the scheduling of the CPU resource and the physical memory. The
overall goal of the hypervisor is to provide virtual machines with a virtualization of the
hardware, providing the appearance that each virtual machine has its own (virtualized)
physical machine and multiplexing the virtual resources onto the underlying physical
resources. In achieving this, it must also ensure strong protection between the different
virtual machines it supports.
The hypervisor follows the design of Exokernel (introduced in Section 7.6) by
implementing a minimal set of mechanisms for resource management and isolation and
leaving higher level policy to other parts of the systems architecture – in particular the
domains, as discussed below. The hypervisor also has no knowledge of devices or their
management but rather just provides a conduit for interacting with devices (as again
discussed below). This minimal design is important for two key reasons:
(cid:129) Xen is primarily concerned with isolation, including isolation of faults, and yet a
fault in the hypervisor can crash the whole system. It is therefore important that
the hypervisor is minimal, thoroughly tested and bug-free.
(cid:129) The hypervisor represents an inevitable overhead relative to executing on the bare
hardware, and it is important for the performance of the system that this is as
lightweight as possible (as we shall see below, paravirtualization also helps to
minimize this overhead through bypassing the hypervisor wherever possible).


===== page 340 =====
322 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
The role of the hypervisor is to support a potentially large number of virtual machine
instances (called domains in Xen) all running guest operating systems. The guest
operating systems run in a set of domains referred to collectively as domainU, or the
unprivileged domain, referring to their lack of privilege in terms of accessing physical
(as opposed to virtual) resources. In other words, all access to resources is carefully
controlled by Xen. Xen also supports a special domain, referred to as domain0, that has
privileged access to hardware resources and acts as a control plane for the Xen
architecture providing a clean separation between mechanism and policy in the system
(we will see examples of the usage of domain0 below). Domain0 is configured to run a
Xen port of Linux (XenoLinux), whereas other domains can run any guest operating
system. Note that the Xen architecture allows selected privileges to be granted to
domainU, specifically the ability to access hardware devices directly or to create new
domains. In practice, though, the most common configuration is for domain0 to retain
these privileges.
To continue our study of Xen, we consider the implementation of the core
functions of the hypervisor – namely, the virtualization of the underlying hardware
(including the use of paravirtualization), scheduling and virtual memory management –
before showing how Xen supports the management of devices, We conclude by
considering what it takes to port a given operating system to Xen.
Virtualization of the underlying CPU: The primary role of the hypervisor is to provide each
domain with a virtualization of the underlying CPU, that is provide the appearance that
each domain has its own (virtual) CPU and associated instruction set. The complexity
of this step depends entirely on the architecture of the given CPU. In this section, we
focus particularly on virtualization as it applies to the x86 architecture, the dominant
processor family in use today.
Popek and Goldberg [1974], in a classic paper on virtualization requirements,
focus on all instructions that can change the state of the machine in a way that can impact
on other processes (sensitive instructions), further subdividing such instructions into:
(cid:129) control-sensitive instructions that attempt to change the configuration of resources
in the system, for example changing virtual memory mappings;
(cid:129) behaviour-sensitive instructions that read privileged state and through this reveal
physical rather than virtual resources, thus breaking the virtualization.
They then state that a condition for being virtualizable is that all sensitive instructions
(control- and behaviour-sensitive) must be intercepted by the hypervisor (or equivalent
kernel mechanism). More specifically, this is achieved by trapping into the hypervisor,
supported by the concept of privileged instructions in a machine architecture – that is,
instructions that either execute in privileged mode or generate a trap (which can then
take them into privileged mode). This leads to the following precise statement of the
Popek and Goldberg condition:
Condition for virtualization : A processor architecture lends itself to virtualization if
all sensitive instructions are privileged instructions.
Unfortunately, in the x86 family of processors, this is not the case: it is possible to
identify 17 instructions that are sensitive but not privileged. For example, the LAR (load
access rights) and LSL (load segment limit) instructions fall into this category. They


===== page 341 =====
SECTION 7.7 VIRTUALIZATION AT THE OPERATING SYSTEM LEVEL 323
need to be trapped by the hypervisor to ensure correct virtualization, but there is no
mechanism to do this as they are not privileged.
One solution is to provide a layer of emulation for all instructions in the instruction
set. It is then possible to manage sensitive instructions within this layer. This is what is
done in full virtualization and this approach has the advantage that guest operating
systems can run unchanged in this virtualized environment. However, this approach can
be expensive, adding cost to every affected instruction call. Paravirtualization, in
contrast, takes the view that many instructions can run directly on the bare hardware
without emulation and that privileged instructions should be trapped and dealt with by
the hypervisor. This then leaves the sensitive instructions that are not privileged; a
paravirtualization solution recognizes that such instructions can lead to potential
problems but leaves this to be dealt with in the guest operating system. In other words,
the guest operating system must be rewritten to tolerate or deal with any side effects of
these instructions. One approach, for example, is to rewrite sections of the code to avoid
the usage of problematic instructions. This paravirtualization approach greatly improves
the performance of virtualization, but at the expense of requiring a port of the guest
operating system to the virtualized environment.
To understand the implementation of paravirtualization further, it is helpful to
look at levels (or rings) of privilege in modern processors. For example, the x86 family
supports four levels of privilege with ring 0 being the most privileged, ring 1 being the
next most privileged and so on, with ring 3 being the least privileged. In a traditional
operating system environment, the kernel will run in ring 0 and applications in ring 3
with rings 1 and 2 unused. Traps take the flow of control from the application to the
kernel and allow privileged activities to take place. In Xen, the hypervisor runs in ring
0 and this is the only ring that can execute privileged instructions. The guest operating
systems then run in ring 1, with applications running in ring 3. Privileged instructions
are rewritten as hypercalls that trap into the hypervisor allowing the hypervisor to
control execution of these potentially sensitive operations. All other sensitive
instructions must be managed by the guest operating system, as discussed above.
This distinction between kernel-based operating systems and Xen is summarized
inFigure 7.18.
Hypercalls are asynchronous and hence represent notifications that the
corresponding instructions should be executed (there is no blocking in the guest
operating system awaiting a result). Communication between the hypervisor and the
guest operating system is also asynchronous and is supported by a simple event
mechanism offered by the Xen hypervisor. This is used, for example, to deal with device
interrupts. The hypervisor maps such hardware interrupts to software events targeted
towards the right guest operating system. The Xen hypervisor is therefore completely
event-driven.
Scheduling: We saw in Section 7.4 that many operating system environments support
two levels of scheduling – that is, the scheduling of processes and the subsequent
scheduling of user-level threads within processes. Xen goes one step further,
introducing an extra level of scheduling concerned with the execution of particular guest
operating systems. It achieves this by introducing the concept of a virtual CPU (VCPU),
with each VCPU supporting a guest system. Scheduling therefore involves the following
steps:


===== page 342 =====
324 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.18 Use of rings of privilege
kernel hypervisor guest OS
ring 3
ring 3
ring 2
ring 2
ring 1
ring 1
ring 0
ring 0
applications applications
a) kernel-based operating systems b) paravirtualization in Xen
(cid:129) The hypervisor schedules VCPUs on to the underlying physical CPU(s), thereby
providing each guest with a portion of the underlying physical processing time.
(cid:129) Guest operating systems schedule kernel-level threads on to their allocated
VCPU(s).
(cid:129) Where applicable, threads libraries in user space schedule user-level threads onto
the available kernel-level threads.
The key requirement in Xen is that the design of the underlying hypervisor scheduler is
predictable, as higher-level schedulers will make assumptions about the behaviour of
this scheduler and it is crucial that these assumptions are met.
Xen supports two schedulers, Simple EDF and the Credit Scheduler:
Xen’s Simple Earliest Deadline First (SEDF) Scheduler: This scheduler operates
by selecting the VCPU that has the closest deadline, with deadlines calculated
according to two parameters, n (the slice) and m (the period). For example, a domain
can request 10 ms (n) every 100 ms (m). The deadline is defined as the latest time this
domain can be run to meet its deadline. Returning to our example, at the start point
of the system, this VCPU can be scheduled as late as 90 ms into the 100 ms period
and still meet its deadline. The scheduler operates by picking the earliest of the
current deadlines, looking across the set of runnable VCPUs.
Xen’s Credit Scheduler: For this scheduler, each domain (VCPU) is specified in
terms of two properties, the weight and the cap. The weight determines the share of
the CPU that should be given to that VCPU. For example, if one VCPU has a weight
of 64 and another a weight of 32, the first VCPU should get double the share of the
second. Legal weights range from 1 to 65535, with the default being 256. This


===== page 343 =====
SECTION 7.7 VIRTUALIZATION AT THE OPERATING SYSTEM LEVEL 325
behaviour is modified by the cap, which expresses the total percentage of the CPU
that should be given to the corresponding VCPU, expressed as a percentage. This can
be left as uncapped. The scheduler transforms the weight associated with a VCPU
into credits, and as the VCPU runs, it consumes credits. The VCPU is deemed under
if it has credits left; otherwise it is deemed over. For each CPU, the scheduler
maintains a queue of runnable VCPUs, with all the under VCPUs first, followed by
theover VCPUs. When a VCPU is unscheduled, it is placed in this queue at the end
of the appropriate category (depending upon whether it is now under or over credit).
The scheduler then picks the first element in the queue to run next. As a form of load
balancing, if a given CPU has no under VCPUs, it will search the queues of other
CPUs for a possible candidate to schedule.
These replace previous Xen schedulers, including a simple round robin scheduler, one
based on borrowed virtual time (designed to provide a proportional share of the
underlying CPU based on setting different domain weights), and Atropos (designed to
support soft real-time scheduling). Further details of these schedulers can be found in
Chisnall [2007].
It is also possible to add new schedulers to the Xen hypervisor, but this is
something that should be done with caution and after extensive testing because of the
requirements of the hypervisor as discussed above. Chisnall [2007] provides a step-by-
step guide on how to implement such a simple scheduler in Xen.
Interaction between guest operating systems and the underlying scheduler is via a
number of scheduler-specific hypercalls, including operations to voluntary yield the
CPU (but remain runnable), to block a particular domain until an event has occurred or
toshutdown the domain for a specified reason.
Virtual memory management: Virtual memory management is the most complicated
aspect of virtualization partly because of the complexity of underlying hardware
solutions to memory management and partly because of the need to inject extra levels
of protection to provide isolation between different domains. We provide below some
general principles of memory management in Xen. The reader is encouraged to study
the detailed description of virtual memory management in Xen provided by Chisnall
[2007].
The overall approach to virtualization of memory management in Xen is captured
in Figure 7.19. As with scheduling, Xen adopts a three-level architecture with the
hypervisor managing physical memory, the kernel of the guest operating system
providing pseudo-physical memory and applications within that operating system
provided with virtual memory, as would be expected of any underlying operating
system. The concept of pseudo-physical memory is crucial to understanding this
architecture and is described further below.
The key design decision in the virtual memory management architecture is to keep
the functionality of the hypervisor to a minimum. The hypervisor effectively has just
two roles – the allocation and subsequent management of physical memory in the form
of pages:
(cid:129) In terms of memory allocation, the hypervisor retains a small portion of physical
memory for its own needs and then allocates pages to domains on demand. For
example, when a new domain is created, it is given a set of pages according to its
declared needs. In practice, this set of pages will be fragmented across the physical


===== page 344 =====
326 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.19 Virtualization of memory management
Application Virtual
Guest OS Pseudo-physical
Hypervisor
Physical
address space, and this may be in conflict with the expectations of the guest
operating system (which may expect a contiguous address space). The role of the
pseudo-physical memory is to provide this abstraction by offering a contiguous
pseudo-physical address space and then maintaining a mapping from this address
space to the real physical addresses. Crucially, this mapping must be managed by
the guest operating system and not in the hypervisor, to maintain the lightweight
nature of the hypervisor (more specifically, the composition of the two functions
shown in Figure 7.19 is carried out in the guest). This approach allows the guest
operating system to interpret the mapping in its own context (for example, for
some guest operating systems where contiguous addresses are not expected, this
mapping can be eliminated) and also makes it easier to migrate a domain to a
different address space, for example in server consolidation. The same mechanism
is also used to support suspension and resumption of guest operating systems. On
suspension, the state of the domain is serialized to disk, and on resumption, this
state is restored but in a different physical location. This is supported by the extra
level of indirection in the memory management architecture.
(cid:129) In terms of managing the physical memory, the hypervisor exports a small set of
hypercalls to manipulate the underlying page tables. As an illustration, the
hypercallpt_update(list of requests) is used by a guest operating system to request
a batch of incremental updates to a page table. This allows the hypervisor to
validate all the requests and carry out only those updates that are deemed safe, for
example to enforce isolation.
The overall result is a flexible approach to virtual memory management that allows
guest operating systems to optimize their implementation for different processor
families.


===== page 345 =====
SECTION 7.7 VIRTUALIZATION AT THE OPERATING SYSTEM LEVEL 327
Figure 7.20 Split device drivers
Domain0 Domain0:
Guest O
Real device Split device Split device
driver driver driver
Hypervisor
Shared
memory
Hardware
Physical
device
Device management: The Xen approach to device management relies on the concept of
split device drivers, as shown in Figure 7.20. As can be seen from this figure, access to
the physical device is controlled exclusively by domain0, which also hosts a real device
driver for this device. As domain0 runs XenoLinux, this will be an available Linux
device driver. It is important to stress that while some device drivers have good support
for multiplexing, others do not, and hence it is important for Xen to provide an
abstraction whereby each guest operating system can have the appearance of its own
virtual device. This is achieved by the split driver structure involving a back-end device
driver running in domain0 and a front-end driver running in the guest operating system.
The two then communicate to provide the necessary device access for the guest
operating system. The respective roles of the back-end and front-end parts of the driver
are as follows:
(cid:129) The back end has two critical roles to play in the architecture. Firstly, it must
manage multiplexing (in particular access from multiple guest operating systems),
especially where support is not provided in the underlying Linux driver. Secondly,
it provides a generic interface that both captures the essential functions of the
device and is neutral to the different guest operating systems that will use it. This
is made easier because operating systems already provide a number of
abstractions that effectively provide the necessary multiplexing in a neutral way,
for example reading and writing blocks to persistent storage. Higher-level
interfaces (for example, sockets) would be inappropriate as they would be too
biased towards given operating system abstractions.


===== page 346 =====
328 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.21 I/O rings
Response start
Request end
Response end
Request start
(cid:129) Thefront end, in contrast, is very simple and acts as a proxy for the device in the
guest operating system environment, accepting commands and then
communicating with the back end as described below.
Communication between the front end and back end of the split device structure is
facilitated by the creation of a memory page shared between the two components. The
region of shared memory is established using a grant table mechanism supported by the
hypervisor. A grant table is an array of structures (grant entries) that supports operations
to provide permissions to grant foreign access to a memory reservation or to access other
memory reservations via grant references. Access can be granted to read or write the
shared memory region. This mechanism provides a lightweight and high-performance
means for different domains to communicate in Xen.
The normal mechanism to communicate is to use a data structure known as an I/O
ring in this shared memory region, which supports two-way asynchronous
communication between the two parts of the split device driver. The structure of an I/O
ring is shown in Figure 7.21. Domains communicate through requests and responses. In
particular, a domain writes its request clockwise, starting at the request start indicator
(assuming there is enough room) and moving on the pointer accordingly. The other end
can then read the data from its end, again moving the associated pointer. The same
procedure then occurs for responses. For devices that continually transfer large amounts
of data, the corresponding endpoints will poll this data structure. For less frequent
transfers, I/O rings can be supplemented by the use of the Xen event mechanism to
notify the recipient that data is ready for consumption. The mechanism for device
discovery is via a shared information space called XenStore, accessible by all domains.
XenStore is itself implemented as a device using the split device architecture, which
device drivers use to advertise their services. The information provided includes the
grant reference for the I/O rings associated with the device and also (where appropriate)


===== page 347 =====
SECTION 7.7 VIRTUALIZATION AT THE OPERATING SYSTEM LEVEL 329
any event channels associated with the device. The range of communication facilities
used by device drivers (I/O rings, events and XenStore) are collectively referred to as
XenBus.
A given Xen installation can provide different configurations of device drivers. It
is expected, though, that most Xen implementations will provide two generic drivers:
(cid:129) The first one is the block device driver, offering a common abstraction onto block
devices (most commonly storage devices). The interface to this is very simple,
supporting three operations: to read or write a block and also to implement a write
barrier ensuring that all outstanding writes are completed.
(cid:129) The second one is the Xen Virtual Interface Network Driver, which offers a
common interface to interact with network devices. This uses two I/O rings for
transmitting and receiving data to/from the network. Strictly speaking, the rings
are used for control flow and separate shared memory areas are used for the
associated data (which helps in terms of minimizing copies and reusing memory
regions).
Note that most of this architecture is implemented above the hypervisor, in domain0 and
the other guest operating systems. The role of the hypervisor is simply to facilitate inter-
domain communication, for example through the grant table mechanism, and the rest is
built on top of this minimal base. This helps considerably in terms of keeping the
hypervisor small and efficient.
Porting a guest operating system: From the descriptions above, it is now possible to see
what is required in terms of porting an operating system to the Xen environment. This
involves several key stages:
(cid:129) replacing all privileged instructions used by the operating system with the relevant
hypercalls;
(cid:129) taking all other sensitive instructions and reimplementing them in a way that
preserves the desired semantics of the associated operations;
(cid:129) porting the virtual memory subsystem;
(cid:129) developing split-level device drivers for the required set of devices, reusing the
device driver functionality already provided in domain0 together with the generic
device driver interfaces where appropriate.
This list covers the major tasks, but there are also some other, more specific tasks that
need to be carried out. For example, Xen offers its own time architecture, recognizing
the difference between real time and time passing as viewed by individual guest
operating systems.
In more detail, the hypervisor provides support for various time abstractions –
specifically, an underlying cycle counter time based on the clock of the underlying
processor and used to extrapolate other time references; domain virtual time, which
progresses at the same rate as cycle counter time but only when a particular domain is
scheduled; system time, which accurately reflects the passing of real time in the system;
andwall clock time, providing the actual time of day. It is assumed that operating system
instances running in domains will provide real time and virtual time abstractions on top
of these values, requiring further porting effort. Interestingly, both system time and wall


===== page 348 =====
330 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
Figure 7.22 The XenoServer Open Platform Architecture
charge_from_purchase_order XenoCorp
register_client
validate_purchase_order
create_purchase_order
register_xenoserver
Xenoserver
advertise_xenoserver lookup_xenoserver
Information
update
Service
XenoServer Client
find_xenoservers
RD System
query_xenoserver_status
create_session
deploy_task
clock time are corrected automatically for clock drift, exploiting a single instance of an
NTP client (described in Chapter 14) running in domain0. This is just one example of
the optimizations that are enabled by the shared domain0.
The XenoServer Open Platform • As mentioned above, Xen was initially developed as
part of the XenoServer project, which investigated software infrastructure for wide area
distributed computing. We now describe the overall architecture of the associated
XenoServer Open Platform [Hand et al. 2003]. In this architecture, which is shown in
Figure 7.22, clients register with an entity known as XenoCorp in order to use the
system. The developers of the XenoServer Open Architecture anticipate a number of
competing instances of XenoCorps existing in a given system offering different
payment regimes and levels of quality of service (for example, varying support for
privacy). More formally, the role of a given XenoCorp is to offer authentication,
auditing, charging and payment services and to maintain a contractual relationship with
both clients and organizations offering XenoServers. This is supported by a process of
registration whereby identity is established, and the creation of purchase orders that
represent the commitment by the (authenticated) client to fund a given session.
In the overall architecture, XenoServers compete against each other to offer
services. The role of the XenoServer Information Service is then to allow XenoServers
to advertise their services and for clients to locate appropriate XenoServers based on


===== page 349 =====
SECTION 7.8 SUMMARY 331
their specified requirements. Advertisements are specified using XML and include
clauses covering functionality, resource availability and pricing.
The Information Service is relatively primitive, offering basic search mechanisms
over the set of advertisements. To complement this, the platform architecture also offers
a resource discovery (RD) system supporting more complex queries, such as:
(cid:129) Find a XenoServer with a low-latency link to the client that meets certain resource
requirements for a given price, o.r
(cid:129) Find a cluster of XenoServers that are inter-connected by low-latency links,
support secure communication and meet certain resource requirements.
The main innovation in the XenoServer project is in how it couples the above
architecture with virtualization – each XenoServer runs the Xen virtual machine
monitor, allowing clients to bid for virtual rather than physical resources and allowing
the system to manage the set of resources more effectively because of this virtualization.
This is a direct illustration of the complementary nature of cloud computing and
virtualization, as discussed above.
7.8 Summary
This chapter has described how the operating system supports the middleware layer in
providing invocations upon shared resources. The operating system provides a
collection of mechanisms upon which varying resource management policies can be
implemented, to meet local requirements and to take advantage of technological
improvements. It allows servers to encapsulate and protect resources, while allowing
clients to share them concurrently. It also provides the mechanisms necessary for clients
to invoke operations upon resources.
A process consists of an execution environment and threads: an execution
environment consists of an address space, communication interfaces and other local
resources such as semaphores; a thread is an activity abstraction that executes within an
execution environment. Address spaces need to be large and sparse in order to support
sharing and mapped access to objects such as files. New address spaces may be created
with their regions inherited from parent processes. An important technique for copying
regions is copy-on-write.
Processes can have multiple threads, which share the execution environment.
Multi-threaded processes allow us to achieve relatively cheap concurrency and to take
advantage of multiprocessors for parallelism. They are useful for both clients and
servers. Recent threads implementations allow for two-tier scheduling: the kernel
provides access to multiple processors, while user-level code handles the details of
scheduling policy.
The operating system provides basic message-passing primitives and mechanisms
for communication via shared memory. Most kernels include network communication
as a basic facility; others provide only local communication and leave network
communication to servers, which may implement a range of communication protocols.
This is a trade-off of performance against flexibility.


===== page 350 =====
332 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
We discussed remote invocations and accounted for the difference between
overheads due directly to network hardware and overheads that are due to the execution
of operating system code. We found the proportion of the total time due to software to
be relatively large for a null invocation but to decrease as a proportion of the total as the
size of the invocation arguments grows. The chief overheads involved in an invocation
that are candidates for optimization are marshalling, data copying, packet initialization,
thread scheduling and context switching, as well as the flow control protocol used.
Invocation between address spaces within a computer is an important special case, and
we described the thread-management and parameter-passing techniques used in
lightweight RPC.
There are two main approaches to kernel architecture: monolithic kernels and
microkernels. The main difference between them lies in where the line is drawn between
resource management by the kernel and resource management performed by
dynamically loaded (and usually user-level) servers. A microkernel must support at least
a notion of process and interprocess communication. It supports operating system
emulation subsystems as well as language support and other subsystems, such as those
for real-time processing. Virtualization offers an attractive alternative to this style by
providing emulation of the hardware and then allowing multiple virtual machines (and
hence multiple operating systems) to coexist on the same machine.
EXERCISES
7.1 Discuss the tasks of encapsulation, concurrent processing, protection, name resolution,
communication of parameters and results, and scheduling in the context of the UNIX file
service (or that of another kernel that is familiar to you). page 282
7.2 Why are some system interfaces implemented by dedicated system calls (to the kernel),
and others on top of message-based system calls? page 282
7.3 Smith decides that every thread in his processes ought to have its own protected stack –
all other regions in a process would be fully shared. Does this make sense? page 286
7.4 Should signal (software interrupt) handlers belong to a process or to a thread?
page 286
7.5 Discuss the issue of naming applied to shared memory regions. page 288
7.6 Suggest a scheme for balancing the load on a set of computers. You should discuss:
i) what user or system requirements are met by such a scheme;
ii) to what categories of applications it is suited;
iii) how to measure load and with what accuracy;
iv) how to monitor load and choose the location for a new process. Assume that
processes may not be migrated.
How would your design be affected if processes could be migrated between computers?
Would you expect process migration to have a significant cost? page 289


===== page 351 =====
EXERCISES 333
7.7 Explain the advantage of copy-on-write region copying for UNIX, where a call to fork
is typically followed by a call to exec. What should happen if a region that has been
copied using copy-on-write is itself copied? page 291
7.8 A file server uses caching and achieves a hit rate of 80%. File operations in the server
cost 5 ms of CPU time when the server finds the requested block in the cache, and an
additional 15 ms of disk I/O time otherwise. Explaining any assumptions you make,
estimate the server’s throughput capacity (average requests/sec) if it is:
i) single-threaded;
ii) two-threaded, running on a single processor;
iii) two-threaded, running on a two-processor computer. page 292
7.9 Compare the worker pool multi-threading architecture with the thread-per-request
architecture. page 293
7.10 What thread operations are the most significant in cost? page 295
7.11 A spin lock (see Bacon [2002]) is a boolean variable accessed via an atomic test-and-set
instruction, which is used to obtain mutual exclusion. Would you use a spin lock to
obtain mutual exclusion between threads on a single-processor computer? page 298
7.12 Explain what the kernel must provide for a user-level implementation of threads, such
as Java on UNIX. page 300
7.13 Do page faults present a problem for user-level threads implementations? page 300
7.14 Explain the factors that motivate the hybrid scheduling approach of the ‘scheduler
activations’ design (instead of pure user-level or kernel-level scheduling). page 301
7.15 Why should a threads package be interested in the events of a thread’s becoming
blocked or unblocked? Why should it be interested in the event of a virtual processor’s
impending preemption? (Hint: other virtual processors may continue to be allocated.)
page 302
7.16 Network transmission time accounts for 20% of a null RPC and 80% of an RPC that
transmits 1024 user bytes (less than the size of a network packet). By what percentage
will the times for these two operations improve if the network is upgraded from 10
megabits/second to 100 megabits/second? page305
7.17 A ‘null’ RMI that takes no parameters, calls an empty procedure and returns no values
delays the caller for 2.0 milliseconds. Explain what contributes to this time.
In the same RMI system, each 1K of user data adds an extra 1.5 milliseconds. A client
wishes to fetch 32K of data from a file server. Should it use one 32K RMI or 32 1K
RMIs? page305
7.18 Which factors identified in the cost of a remote invocation also feature in message
passing? page 307
7.19 Explain how a shared region could be used for a process to read data written by the
kernel. Include in your explanation what would be necessary for synchronization.
page 308


===== page 352 =====
334 CHAPTER 7 OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT
7.20 i) Can a server invoked by lightweight procedure calls control the degree of
concurrency within it?
ii) Explain why and how a client is prevented from calling arbitrary code within a
server under lightweight RPC.
iii) Does LRPC expose clients and servers to greater risks of mutual interference than
conventional RPC (given the sharing of memory)? page309
7.21 A client makes RMIs to a server. The client takes 5 ms to compute the arguments for
each request, and the server takes 10 ms to process each request. The local OS
processing time for each send or receive operation is 0.5 ms, and the network time to
transmit each request or reply message is 3 ms. Marshalling or unmarshalling takes 0.5
ms per message.
Estimate the time taken by the client to generate and return from two requests (i) if it is
single-threaded, and (ii) if it has two threads that can make requests concurrently on a
single processor. Is there a need for asynchronous RMI if processes are multi-threaded?
page311
7.22 Explain what a security policy is and what the corresponding mechanisms are in the case
of a multiuser operating system such as UNIX. page 314
7.23 Explain the program linkage requirements that must be met if a server is to be
dynamically loaded into the kernel’s address space, and how these differ from the case
of executing a server at the user level. page 315
7.24 How could an interrupt be communicated to a user-level server? page 317
7.25 On a certain computer we estimate that, regardless of the OS it runs, thread scheduling
costs about 50 (cid:80)s, a null procedure call 1 ms, a context switch to the kernel 20 (cid:80)s and a
domain transition 40 (cid:80)s. For each of Mach and SPIN, estimate the cost to a client of
calling a dynamically loaded null procedure. page317
7.26 What is the distinction between the virtualization approach advocated by Xen and the
style of microkernel advocated by the Exokernel project? In your answer, highlight two
things they have in common and two distinguishing characteristics between the
approaches. pages317,320
7.27 Sketch out in pseudo-code how you would add a simple round robin scheduler to the
Xen hypervisor using the framework discussed in Section 7.7.2. page323
7.28 From your understanding of the Xen approach to virtualization, discuss specific features
of Xen that can support the XenoServer architecture, thus illustrating the synergy
between virtualization and cloud computing. pages320,330


===== page 353 =====
8
DISTRIBUTED(cid:3)
OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
8.1 Introduction
8.2 Distributed objects
8.3 Case study: CORBA
8.4 From objects to components
8.5 Case studies: Enterprise JavaBeans and Fractal
8.6 Summary
A complete middleware solution must present a higher-level programming abstraction as
well as abstracting over the underlying complexities involved in distributed systems. This
chapter examines two of the most important programming abstractions, namely
distributed objects and components, and also examines associated middleware platforms
including CORBA, Enterprise JavaBeans and Fractal.
CORBA is a middleware design that allows application programs to communicate
with one another irrespective of their programming languages, their hardware and
software platforms, the networks they communicate over and their implementors.
Applications are built from CORBA objects, which implement interfaces defined in
CORBA’s interface definition language, IDL. Like Java RMI, CORBA supports transparent
invocation of methods on remote objects. The middleware component that supports RMI
is called the object request broker, or ORB.
Component-based middleware has emerged as a natural evolution of distributed
objects, providing support for managing dependencies between components, hiding low-
level details associated with the middleware, managing the complexities of establishing
distributed applications with appropriate non-functional properties such as security, and
supporting appropriate deployment strategies. Key technologies in this area include
Enterprise JavaBeans and Fractal.
335


===== page 354 =====
336 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
8.1 Introduction
The previous chapters introduced fundamental underlying building blocks for
distributed systems in terms of communication and operating system support. This
chapter turns to complete middleware solutions, presenting distributed objects and
components as two of the most important styles of middleware in use today. This
discussion is followed in Chapters 9 and 10 with consideration of alternative approaches
based on web services and peer-to-peer solutions.
As discussed in Chapter 2, the task of middleware is to provide a higher-level
programming abstraction for the development of distributed systems and, through
layering, to abstract over heterogeneity in the underlying infrastructure to promote
interoperability and portability.
Distributed object middleware • The key characteristic of distributed objects is that they
allow you to adopt an object-oriented programming model for the development of
distributed systems and, through this, hide the underlying complexity of distributed
programming. In this approach, communicating entities are represented by objects.
Objects communicate mainly using remote method invocation, but also possibly using
an alternative communication paradigm (such as distributed events). This relatively
simple approach has a number of important benefits, including the following:
(cid:129) Theencapsulation inherent in object-based solutions is well suited to distributed
programming.
(cid:129) The related property of data abstraction provides a clean separation between the
specification of an object and its implementation, allowing programmers to deal
solely in terms of interfaces and not be concerned with implementation details
such as the programming language and operating system used.
(cid:129) This approach also lends itself to more dynamic and extensible solutions, for
example by enabling the introduction of new objects or the replacement of one
object with another (compatible) object.
A range of middleware solutions based on distributed objects are available, including
Java RMI and CORBA. We summarize the key features of distributed objects in Section
8.2 and provide a detailed case study of CORBA in Section 8.3.
Component-based middleware • Component-based solutions have been developed to
overcome a number of limitations that have been observed for application developers
working with distributed object middleware:
Implicit dependencies: Object interfaces do not describe what the implementation of
an object depends on, making object-based systems difficult to develop (especially
for third-party developers) and subsequently manage.
Programming complexity: Programming distributed object middleware leads to a
need to master many low-level details associated with middleware implementations.
Lack of separation of distribution concerns: Application developers are obliged to
consider details of concerns such as security, failure handling and concurrency,
which are largely similar from one application to another.


===== page 355 =====
SECTION 8.2 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS 337
No support for deployment: Object-based middleware provides little or no support
for the deployment of (potentially complex) configurations of objects.
Component-based solutions can best be understood as a natural evolution of object-
based approaches, building on the strong heritage of this earlier work. Section 8.4
discusses this rationale in more detail and introduces the key features of a component-
based approach. Section 8.5 then presents two contrasting case studies of component-
based solutions, Enterprise JavaBeans and Fractal, with the former offering a
comprehensive solution that abstracts over many of the key issues in developing
distributed applications and the latter representing a more lightweight solution often
used to construct more complex middleware technologies.
8.2 Distributed objects
Middleware based on distributed objects is designed to provide a programming model
based on object-oriented principles and therefore to bring the benefits of the object-
oriented approach to distributed programming.
Emmerich [2000] sees such distributed objects as a natural evolution from three
strands of activity:
(cid:129) In distributed systems, earlier middleware was based on the client-server model
and there was a desire for more sophisticated programming abstractions.
(cid:129) In programming languages, earlier work in object-oriented languages such as
Simula-67 and Smalltalk led to the emergence of more mainstream and heavily
used programming languages such as Java and C++ (languages used extensively
in distributed systems).
(cid:129) In software engineering, significant progress was made in the development of
object-oriented design methods, leading to the emergence of the Unified
Modelling Language (UML) as an industrial-standard notation for specifying
(potentially distributed) object-oriented software systems.
In other words, through adopting an object-oriented approach, distributed systems
developers are not only provided with richer programming abstractions (using familiar
programming languages such as C++ and Java) but are also able to use object-oriented
design principles, tools and techniques (including UML) in the development of
distributed systems software. This represents a major step forward in an area where,
previously, such design techniques were not available. It is interesting to note that the
OMG, the organization that developed CORBA (see Section 8.3), also manages the
standardization of UML.
Distributed object middleware offers a programming abstraction based on object-
oriented principles. Leading examples of distributed object middleware include Java
RMI (discussed in Section 5.5) and CORBA (examined in depth in Section 8.3 below).
While Java RMI and CORBA share a lot in common, there is one important difference:
the use of Java RMI is restricted to Java-based development, whereas CORBA is a
multi-language solution allowing objects written in a variety of languages to
interoperate. (Bindings exist for C++, Java, Python and several others.)


===== page 356 =====
338 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.1 Distributed objects
Objects Distributed objects Description of distributed object
Object references Remote object references Globally unique reference for a
distributed object; may be passed as a
parameter.
Interfaces Remote interfaces Provides an abstract specification of the
methods that can be invoked on the
remote object; specified using an
interface definition language (IDL).
Actions Distributed actions Initiated by a method invocation,
potentially resulting in invocation
chains; remote invocations use RMI.
Exceptions Distributed exceptions Additional exceptions generated from
the distributed nature of the system,
including message loss or process
failure.
Garbage collection Distributed garbage collection Extended scheme to ensure that an
object will continue to exist if at least
one object reference or remote object
reference exists for that object,
otherwise, it should be removed.
Requires a distributed garbage
collection algorithm.
It must be stressed that programming with distributed objects is both different
from and significantly more complex than standard object-oriented programming, as
summarized below.
The differences: Key differences between objects and distributed objects have already
been covered in Section 5.4.1, in the context of RMI. For convenience, this discussion
is repeated here in summary form (see Figure 8.1). Other differences will emerge when
we look in detail at CORBA in Section 8.3. These include:
(cid:129) Class is a fundamental concept in object-oriented languages but does not feature
so prominently in distributed object middleware. As noted in the CORBA case
study, it is difficult to agree upon a common interpretation of class in a
heterogeneous environment where multiple languages coexist. In the object-
oriented world more generally, class has several interpretations, including the
description of the behaviour associated with a group of objects (the template used
to create an object from the class), the place to go to instantiate an object with a
given behaviour (the associated factory) or even the group of objects that adhere
to that behaviour. While the term ‘class’ is avoided, more specific terms such as


===== page 357 =====
SECTION 8.2 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS 339
‘factory’ and ‘template’ are readily used (a factory being an object that will
instantiate a new object from a given template).
(cid:129) The style of inheritance is significantly different from that offered in most object-
oriented languages. In particular, distributed object middleware offers interface
inheritance, which is a relationship between interfaces whereby the new interface
inherits the method signatures of the original interface and can add extra ones. In
contrast, object-oriented languages such as Smalltalk offer implementation
inheritance as a relationship between implementations, whereby the new class (in
this case) inherits the implementation (and hence behaviour) of the original class
and can add extra behaviour. Implementation inheritance is much more difficult
to implement, particularly in distributed systems, due to the need to resolve the
correct executable behaviour at runtime. Consider, for example, the level of
heterogeneity that may exist in a distributed system, together with the need to
implement highly scalable solutions.
Wegner, in his seminal paper on object-oriented languages [Wegner 1987], defines
object orientation as objects + class + inheritance. In distributed systems, clearly the
interpretation is somewhat different, with both class and inheritance avoided or adapted.
What remains is a strong focus on encapsulation and data abstraction, together with the
powerful links to design methodologies as emphasized above.
The added complexities: Because of the added complexities involved, the associated
distributed object middleware must provide additional functionality, as summarized
below:
Inter-object communication: A distributed object middleware framework must offer
one or more mechanisms for objects to communicate in the distributed environment.
This is normally provided by remote method invocation, although distributed object
middleware often supplements this with other communications paradigms (for
example, indirect approaches such as distributed events). CORBA provides an event
service and an associated notification service, both implemented as services on top
of the core middleware (see Section 8.3.4).
Lifecycle management: Lifecycle management is concerned with the creation,
migration and deletion of objects, with each step having to deal with the distributed
nature of the underlying environment.
Activation and deactivation: In non-distributed implementations, it can often be
assumed that objects are active all the time while the process that contains them runs.
In distributed systems, however, this cannot be assumed as the numbers of objects
may be very large, and hence it would be wasteful of resources to have all objects
available at any time. In addition, nodes hosting objects may be unavailable for
periods of time. Activation is the process of making an object active in the distributed
environment by providing the necessary resources for it to process incoming
invocations – effectively, locating the object in virtual memory and giving it the
necessary threads to execute. Deactivation is then the opposite process, rendering an
object temporarily unable to process invocations.
Persistence: Objects typically have state, and it is important to maintain this state
across possible cycles of activation and deactivation and indeed system failures.


===== page 358 =====
340 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Distributed object middleware must therefore offer persistency management for
stateful objects.
Additional services: A comprehensive distributed object middleware framework
must also provide support for the range of distributed system services considered in
this book, including naming, security and transaction services.
8.3 Case study: CORBA
The Object Management Group (OMG) was formed in 1989 with a view to encouraging
the adoption of distributed object systems in order to gain the benefits of object-oriented
programming for software development and to make use of distributed systems, which
were becoming widespread. To achieve its aims, the OMG advocated the use of open
systems based on standard object-oriented interfaces. These systems would be built
from heterogeneous hardware, computer networks, operating systems and programming
languages.
An important motivation was to allow distributed objects to be implemented in
any programming language and to be able to communicate with one another. The OMG
therefore designed an interface language that was independent of any specific
implementation language.
They introduced a metaphor, the object request broker (ORB), whose role is to
help a client to invoke a method on an object (following the RMI style, as introduced in
Chapter 5). This role involves locating the object, activating the object if necessary and
then communicating the client’s request to the object, which carries it out and replies.
This section presents a case study of OMG’s Common Object Request Broker
Architecture (CORBA), building on this object request broker concept. The presentation
focuses on the CORBA 2 specification (the main innovation in its successor, CORBA
3, is the introduction of a component model, as discussed in Section 8.4).
The main components of CORBA’s language-independent RMI framework are
the following:
(cid:129) an interface definition language known as IDL, which is described in some detail
in Section 8.3.1;
(cid:129) an architecture, which is discussed in Section 8.3.2;
(cid:129) an external data representation, called CDR, which is described in Section 4.3.1 –
it also defines specific formats for the messages in a request-reply protocol and
messages for enquiring about the location of an object, for cancelling requests and
for reporting errors;
(cid:129) a standard form for remote object references, which is described in Section 8.3.3.
The CORBA architecture also allows for CORBA services – a set of generic services
that are useful for distributed applications. These are briefly introduced in Section 8.3.4
(a more complete version of this case study, including detailed consideration of CORBA
services, can be found on the companion web site [www.cdk5.net]).


===== page 359 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 341
Section 8.3.5 also contains an example of developing a client and server using
CORBA.
For an interesting collection of articles on CORBA, see the CACM special issue
[Seetharamanan 1998].
8.3.1 CORBA RMI
Programming in a multi-language RMI system such as CORBA RMI requires more of
the programmer than programming in a single-language RMI system such as Java RMI.
The following new concepts need to be learned:
(cid:129) the object model offered by CORBA;
(cid:129) the interface definition language;
(cid:129) its mapping onto the implementation language.
Other aspects of CORBA programming are similar to those discussed in Chapter 5. In
particular, the programmer defines remote interfaces for the remote objects and then
uses an interface compiler to produce the corresponding proxies and skeletons. But in
CORBA, proxies are generated in the client language and skeletons in the server
language.
CORBA's object model • The CORBA object model is similar to the one described in
Section 5.4.1, but clients are not necessarily objects – a client can be any program that
sends request messages to remote objects and receives replies. The term CORBA object
is used to refer to remote objects. Thus, a CORBA object implements an IDL interface,
has a remote object reference and is able to respond to invocations of methods in its IDL
interface. A CORBA object can be implemented by a language that is not object-
oriented – for example, without the concept of class. Since implementation languages
will have different notions of class, or even none at all, the class concept does not exist
in CORBA (see also the discussion in Section 8.2). Therefore classes cannot be defined
in CORBA IDL, which means that instances of classes cannot be passed as arguments.
However, data structures of various types and of arbitrary complexity can be passed as
arguments.
CORBA IDL • A CORBA IDL interface specifies a name and a set of methods that
clients can request. As an initial example, Figure 8.2 shows two interfaces named Shape
(line 3) and ShapeList (line 5),which are IDL versions of the interfaces defined in Figure
5.16. These are preceded by definitions of two structs, which are used as parameter types
in defining the methods. Note in particular that GraphicalObject is defined as struct,
whereas it was a class in the Java RMI example. A component whose type is struct has
a set of fields containing values of various types, like the instance variables of an object,
but it has no methods.
In more detail, the CORBA IDL provides facilities for defining modules,
interfaces, types, attributes and method signatures. We can see examples of all of the
above, apart from modules, in Figures 5.8 and 8.2. CORBA IDL has the same lexical
rules as C++ but has additional keywords to support distribution, for example, interface,
any, attribute, in, out, inout, readonly and raises. It also allows standard C++
preprocessing facilities. See, for example, the typedef for All in Figure 8.3.


===== page 360 =====
342 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.2 IDL interfaces Shape and ShapeList
struct Rectangle{ 1
long width;
long height;
long x;
long y;
};
struct GraphicalObject { 2
string type;
Rectangle enclosing;
boolean isFilled;
};
interface Shape { 3
long getVersion();
GraphicalObject getAllState(); // returns state of the GraphicalObject
};
typedef sequence <Shape, 100> All; 4
interface ShapeList { 5
exception FullException{ }; 6
Shape newShape(in GraphicalObject g) raises (FullException); 7
All allShapes(); // returns sequence of remote object references 8
long getVersion();
};
The grammar of IDL is a subset of ANSI C++ with additional constructs to
support method signatures. We give here only a brief overview of IDL. A useful
overview and many examples are given in Baker [1997] and Henning and Vinoski
[1999]. The full specification is available on the OMG web site [OMG 2002a].
IDL modules: The module construct allows interfaces and other IDL type definitions to
be grouped in logical units. A module defines a naming scope, which prevents names
defined within a module from clashing with names defined outside it. For example, the
definitions of the interfaces Shape and ShapeList could belong to a module called
Whiteboard, as shown in Figure 8.3.
IDL interfaces: As we have seen, an IDL interface describes the methods that are
available in CORBA objects that implement that interface. Clients of a CORBA object
may be developed just from the knowledge of its IDL interface. From a study of our
examples, readers will see that an interface defines a set of operations and attributes and
generally depends on a set of types defined with it. For example, the PersonList interface
in Figure 5.2 defines an attribute and three methods and depends on the type Person.
IDL methods: The general form of a method signature is:
[oneway] <return_type> <method_name> (parameter1,..., parameterL)
[raises (except1,..., exceptN)] [context (name1,..., nameM)];


===== page 361 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 343
Figure 8.3 IDL module Whiteboard
module Whiteboard {
struct Rectangle{
...};
struct GraphicalObject {
...};
interface Shape {
...};
typedef sequence <Shape, 100> All;
interface ShapeList {
...};
};
where the expressions in square brackets are optional. For an example of a method
signature that contains only the required parts, consider:
void getPerson(in string name, out Person p);
The parameters are labelled as in, out or inout, where the value of an in parameter is
passed from the client to the invoked CORBA object and the value of an out parameter
is passed back from the invoked CORBA object to the client. Parameters labelled as
inout are seldom used, but they indicate that the parameter value may be passed in both
directions. The return type may be specified as void if no value is to be returned. Figure
5.8 illustrates a simple example of the use of those keywords. In Figure 8.2, line 7, the
parameter of newShape is an in parameter to indicate that the argument should be passed
from client to server in the request message. The return value provides an additional out
parameter – it can be indicated as void if there is no out parameter.
The parameters may be any one of the primitive types, such as long or boolean, or
one of the constructed types, such as struct or array (more information on IDL primitive
and constructed types can be found below). Our example shows the definitions of two
structs in lines 1 and 2. Sequences and arrays are defined in typedefs, as shown in line
4, which shows a sequence of elements of type Shape of length 100. The semantics of
parameter passing are as follows:
Passing CORBA objects: Any parameter whose type is specified by the name of an
IDL interface, such as the return value Shape in line 7, is a reference to a CORBA
object and the value of a remote object reference is passed.
Passing CORBA primitive and constructed types: Arguments of primitive and
constructed types are copied and passed by value. On arrival, a new value is created
in the recipient’s process. For example, the struct GraphicalObject passed as an
argument (in line 7) produces a new copy of this struct at the server.
These two forms of parameter passing are combined in the method allShapes (in line 8),
whose return type is an array of type Shape – that is, an array of remote object
references. The return value is a copy of the array in which each of the elements is a
remote object reference.


===== page 362 =====
344 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Invocation semantics: Remote invocation in CORBA has at-most-once call semantics as
the default. However, IDL may specify that the invocation of a particular method has
maybe semantics by using the oneway keyword. The client does not block on oneway
requests, which can be used only for methods that do not return results. For an example
of a oneway request, see the example on callbacks at the end of Section 8.3.5.
Exceptions in CORBA IDL: CORBA IDL allows exceptions to be defined in interfaces and
thrown by their methods. The optional raises expression indicates user-defined
exceptions that can be raised to terminate an execution of the method. Consider the
following example from Figure 8.2:
exception FullException{ };
Shape newShape(in GraphicalObject g) raises (FullException);
The method newShape specifies with the raises expression that it may raise an exception
called FullException,which is defined within the ShapeList interface. In our example,
the exception contains no variables. However, exceptions may be defined to contain
variables, for example:
exception FullException {GraphicalObject g};
When an exception that contains variables is raised, the server may use the variables to
return information to the client about the context of the exception.
CORBA can also produce system exceptions relating to problems with servers
(such as their being too busy or unable to activate objects), problems with
communication and client-side problems. Client programs should handle user-defined
and system exceptions. The optional context expression is used to supply mappings from
string names to string values. See Baker [1997] for an explanation of context.
IDL types: IDL supports 15 primitive types, which include short (16-bit), long (32-bit),
unsigned short, unsigned long, float (32-bit), double (64-bit), char, boolean (TRUE,
FALSE), octet (8-bit) and any (which can represent any primitive or constructed type).
Constants of most of the primitive types and constant strings may be declared using the
const keyword. IDL provides a special type called Object, whose values are remote
object references. If a parameter or result is of type Object, then the corresponding
argument may refer to any CORBA object.
IDL’s constructed types, all of which are passed by value in arguments and results,
are described in Figure 8.4. All arrays or sequences used as arguments must be defined
intypedefs. None of the primitive or constructed data types can contain references.
CORBA also supports passing non-CORBA objects by value [OMG 2002c].
These non-CORBA objects are object-like in the sense that they possess both attributes
and methods. However, they are purely local objects in that their operations cannot be
invoked remotely. The pass-by-value facility provides the ability to pass a copy of a non-
CORBA object between client and server.
This is achieved by the addition to IDL of a type called valuetype for representing
non-CORBA objects. A valuetype is a struct with additional method signatures (like
those of an interface), and valuetype arguments and results are passed by value. That is,
the state is passed to the remote site and used to produce a new object at the destination.
The methods of this new object may be invoked locally, causing its state to
diverge from the state of the original object. Passing the implementation of the methods


===== page 363 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 345
Figure 8.4 IDL constructed types
Type Examples Use
sequence typedef sequence <Shape, 100> All;(cid:3) Defines a type for a variable-length
typedef sequence <Shape> All; sequence of elements of a specified IDL
Bounded and unbounded sequences type. An upper bound on the length may
ofShapes be specified.
string string name;(cid:3) Defines a sequence of characters,
typedef string<8> SmallString;(cid:3) terminated by the null character. An
Unbounded and bounded sequences upper bound on the length may be
of characters specified.
array typedef octet uniqueId[12]; Defines a type for a multi-dimensional
typedef GraphicalObject GO[10][8]; fixed-length sequence of elements of a
specified IDL type.
record struct GraphicalObject {(cid:3) Defines a type for a record containing a
string type; (cid:3) group of related entities.
Rectangle enclosing; (cid:3)
boolean isFilled;(cid:3)
};
enumerated enum Rand (cid:3) The enumerated type in IDL maps a type
(Exp, Number, Name); name onto a small set of integer values.
union union Exp switch (Rand) {(cid:3) The IDL discriminated union allows one
case Exp: string vote;(cid:3) of a given set of types to be passed as an
case Number: long n;(cid:3) argument. The header is parameterized
case Name: string s;(cid:3) by an enum, which specifies which
}; member is in use.
is not so straightforward, since the client and server may use different languages.
However, if the client and server are both implemented in Java, the code can be
downloaded. For a common implementation in C++, the necessary code would need to
be present at both client and server.
This facility is useful when it is beneficialto place a copy of an object in the client
process to enable it to receive local invocations. However, it does not get us any nearer
to passing CORBA objects by value.
Attributes: IDL interfaces can have attributes as well as methods. Attributes are like
public class fields in Java. Attributes may be defined as readonly where appropriate. The
attributes are private to CORBA objects, but for each attribute declared, a pair of
accessor methods is generated automatically by the IDL compiler: one to retrieve the
value of the attribute and the other to set it. For readonly attributes, only the getter
method is provided. For example, the PersonList interface defined in Figure 5.2 includes
the following definition of an attribute:
readonly attribute string listname;


===== page 364 =====
346 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Inheritance: IDL interfaces may be extended through interface inheritance, as defined in
Section8.2 above. For example, if interface B extends interface A, this means that it may
add new types, constants, exceptions, methods and attributes to those of A. An extended
interface can redefine types, constants and exceptions but is not allowed to redefine
methods. A value of an extended type is valid as the value of a parameter or result of the
parent type. For example, the type B is valid as the value of a parameter or result of the
type A. In addition, an IDL interface may extend more than one interface. For example,
interfaceZ here extends both B and C:
interface A { };
interface B: A{ };
interface C {};
interface Z : B, C {};
This means that Z has all of the components of both B and C (apart from those it
redefines), as well as those it defines as extensions.
When an interface such as Z extends more than one interface, there is a possibility
that it may inherit a type, constant or exception with the same name from two different
interfaces. For example, suppose that both B and C define a type called Q; the use of Q
in the Z interface will be ambiguous unless a scoped name such as B::Q or C::Q is given.
IDL does not permit an interface to inherit methods or attributes with common names
from two different interfaces.
All IDL interfaces inherit from the type Object, which implies that all IDL
interfaces are compatible with the type Object – which includes remote object
references. This makes it possible to define IDL operations that can takes as an argument
or return as a result a remote object reference of any type. The bind and resolve
operations in the Naming service are examples.
IDL type identifiers: As we will see in section 8.3.2, type identifiers are generated by the
IDL compiler for each type in an IDL interface. For example, the IDL type for the
interfaceShape (Figure 8.3) might be:
IDL:Whiteboard/Shape:1.0
This example shows that an IDL type name has three parts – the IDL prefix, a type name
and a version number. Since interface identifiers are used as keys for accessing interface
definitions in the interface repository (described in Section 8.3.2), programmers must
ensure that they provide a unique mapping to the interfaces themselves. Programmers
may use the IDL prefix pragma to prefix an additional string to the type name in order
to distinguish their own types from those of others.
IDL pragma directives: These allow additional, non-IDL properties to be specified for
components in an IDL interface (see Henning and Vinoski [1999]). These properties
include, for example, specifying that an interface will be used only locally, or supplying
the value of an interface repository ID. Each pragma is introduced by #pragma and
specifies its type, for example:
#pragma version Whiteboard 2.3
CORBA language mappings • The mapping from the types in IDL to types in a given
programming language is quite straightforward. For example, in Java the primitive types
in IDL are mapped to the corresponding primitive types in that language. Structs, enums


===== page 365 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 347
and unions are mapped to Java classes; sequences and arrays in IDL are mapped to
arrays in Java. An IDL exception is mapped to a Java class that provides instance
variables for the fields of the exception and constructors. The mappings in C++ are
similarly straightforward.
However, some difficulties arise with mapping the parameter-passing semantics
of IDL onto those of Java. In particular, IDL allows methods to return several separate
values via output parameters, whereas Java can have only a single result. The Holder
classes are provided to overcome this difference, but this requires the programmer to
make use of them, which is not altogether straightforward. For example, the method
getPerson in Figure 5.2 is defined in IDL as follows:
void getPerson(in string name, out Person p);
In Java, the equivalent method would be defined as:
void getPerson(String name, PersonHolder p);
and the client would have to provide an instance of PersonHolder as the argument of its
invocation. The holder class has an instance variable that holds the value of the argument
for the client to access by RMI when the invocation returns. It also has methods to
transmit the argument between server and client.
Although C++ implementations of CORBA can handle out and inout parameters
quite naturally, C++ programmers suffer from a different set of problems with
parameters, related to storage management. These difficulties arise when object
references and variable-length entities such as strings or sequences are passed as
arguments.
For example, in Orbix [Baker 1997] the ORB keeps reference counts to remote
objects and proxies and releases them when they are no longer needed. It provides
programmers with methods for releasing or duplicating them. Whenever a server
method has finished executing, the out arguments and results are released and the
programmer must duplicate them if they will still be needed. For example, a C++ servant
implementing the ShapeList interface will need to duplicate the references returned by
the method allShapes. Object references passed to clients must be released when they
are no longer needed. Similar rules apply to variable-length parameters.
In general, programmers using IDL not only have to learn the IDL notation itself
but also have an understanding of how its parameters are mapped onto the parameters
of the implementation language.
Asynchronous RMI • CORBA supports a form of asynchronous RMI that allows clients
to make non-blocking invocation requests on CORBA objects [OMG 2004e]. It is
intended to be implemented in the client. Therefore a server is generally unaware of
whether it is invoked synchronously or asynchronously. (One exception is the
Transaction Service, which does need to be aware of the difference.)
Asynchronous RMI adds two new variants to the invocation semantics of RMIs:
(cid:129) callback, in which a client uses an extra parameter to pass a reference to a callback
with each invocation so that the server can call back with the results;
(cid:129) polling, in which the server returns a valuetype object that can be used to poll or
wait for the reply.


===== page 366 =====
348 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.5 The main components of the CORBA architecture
client implementation server
repository
proxy
or dynamic invocation
The architecture of asynchronous RMI allows an intermediate agent to be deployed to
make sure that the request is carried out and, if necessary, to store the reply. Thus it is
appropriate for use in environments where clients may become temporarily
disconnected – such as, for example, a client using a laptop on a train.
8.3.2 The architecture of CORBA
The CORBA architecture is designed to support the role of an object request broker that
enables clients to invoke methods in remote objects, where both clients and servers can
be implemented in a variety of programming languages. The main components of the
CORBA architecture are illustrated in Figure 8.5.
tcejbo retpada ORB ORB noteleks
interface
repository
Request client Servant
program for A core core A
Reply
or dynamic skeleton
This figure should be compared with Figure 5.15, in which case it will be noted
that the CORBA architecture contains three additional components: the object adapter,
the implementation repository and the interface repository.
CORBA provides for both static and dynamic invocations. Static invocations are
used when the remote interface of the CORBA object is known at compile time,
enabling client stubs and server skeletons to be used. If the remote interface is not known
at compile time, dynamic invocation must be used. Most programmers prefer to use
static invocation because it provides a more natural programming model.
We now discuss the components of the architecture, leaving those concerned with
dynamic invocation until last.
ORB core • The role of the ORB core includes all the functionality of the
communication module of Figure 5.15. In addition, an ORB core provides an interface
that includes the following:
(cid:129) operations enabling it to be started and stopped;
(cid:129) operations to convert between remote object references and strings;
(cid:129) operations to provide argument lists for requests using dynamic invocation.
Object adapter • The role of an object adapter is to bridge the gap between CORBA
objects with IDL interfaces and the programming language interfaces of the


===== page 367 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 349
corresponding servant classes. This role also includes that of the remote reference and
dispatcher modules in Figure 5.15. An object adapter has the following tasks:
(cid:129) It creates remote object references for CORBA objects (see Section 8.3.3).
(cid:129) It dispatches each RMI via a skeleton to the appropriate servant.
(cid:129) It activates and deactivates servants.
An object adapter gives each CORBA object a unique object name, which forms part of
its remote object reference. The same name is used each time an object is activated. The
object name may be specified by the application program or generated by the object
adapter. Each CORBA object is registered with its object adapter, which keeps a remote
object table that maps the names of CORBA objects to their servants.
Each object adapter also has its own name, which forms part of the remote object
references of all of the CORBA objects it manages. This name may either be specified
by the application program or generated automatically.
Portable object adapter • The CORBA standard for object adapters is called the
Portable Object Adapter (POA). It is called portable because it allows applications and
servants to be run on ORBs produced by different developers [Vinoski 1998]. This is
achieved by means of the standardization of the skeleton classes and of the interactions
between the POA and the servants.
The POA supports CORBA objects with two different sorts of lifetimes:
(cid:129) those whose lifetimes are restricted to that of the process in which their servants
are instantiated;
(cid:129) those whose lifetimes can span the instantiations of servants in multiple processes.
The former have transient object references and the latter have persistent object
references (see Section 8.3.3).
The POA allows CORBA objects to be instantiated transparently; and in addition
it separates the creation of CORBA objects from the creation of th, servants that
implement those objects. Server applications such as databases with large numbers of
CORBA objects can create servants on demand, only when the objects are accessed. In
this case, they may use database keys for the object names, or they may use a single
servant to support all of these objects.
In addition, it is possible to specify policies to the POA, for example, as to whether
it should provide a separate thread for each invocation, whether the object references
should be persistent or transient and whether there should be a separate servant for each
CORBA object. The default is that a single servant can represent all of the CORBA
objects for its POA.
Note that implementations of CORBA provide interfaces to the functionality of
the POA and the ORB core through pseudo-objects, given this name because they
cannot be used like regular CORBA objects; for example, they cannot be passed as
arguments in RMIs. They do, though, have IDL interfaces and are implemented as
libraries. The POA pseudo-object includes, for example, one method for activating a
POAmanager and another method, servant_to_reference, for registering a CORBA
object; the ORB pseudo-object includes the method init, which must be called to
initialize the ORB, the method resolve_initial_references, which is used to find services


===== page 368 =====
350 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
such as the Naming service and the root POA, and other methods that enable
conversions between remote object references and strings.
Skeletons • Skeleton classes are generated in the language of the server by an IDL
compiler. As described in Section 5.4.2, remote method invocations are dispatched via
the appropriate skeleton to a particular servant, and the skeleton unmarshals the
arguments in request messages and marshals exceptions and results in reply messages.
Client stubs/proxies • These are in the client language. The class of a proxy (for object-
oriented languages) or a set of stub procedures (for procedural languages) is generated
from an IDL interface by an IDL compiler for the client language. As before, the client
stubs/proxies marshal the arguments in invocation requests and unmarshal exceptions
and results in replies.
Implementation repository • An implementation repository is responsible for activating
registered servers on demand and for locating servers that are currently running. The
object adapter name is used to refer to servers when registering and activating them.
An implementation repository stores a mapping from the names of object adapters
to the pathnames of files containing object implementations. Object implementations
and object adapter names are generally registered with the implementation repository
when server programs are installed. When object implementations are activated in
servers, the hostname and port number of the server are added to the mapping:
Implementation repository entry:
object adapter name pathname of object hostname and port number
implementation of server
Not all CORBA objects need to be activated on demand. Some objects, for example
callback objects created by clients, run once and cease to exist when they are no longer
needed. They do not use the implementation repository.
An implementation repository generally allows extra information to be stored
about each server, such as access control information as to who is allowed to activate it
or to invoke its operations. It is possible to replicate information in implementation
repositories in order to provide availability or fault tolerance.
Interface repository • The role of the interface repository is to provide information
about registered IDL interfaces to clients and servers that require it. For an interface of
a given type it can supply the names of the methods and, for each method, the names and
types of the arguments and exceptions. Thus, the interface repository adds a facility for
reflection to CORBA. Suppose that a client program receives a remote reference to a
new CORBA object. If the client has no proxy for it, it can ask the interface repository
about the methods of the object and the types of parameter each of them requires.
When an IDL compiler processes an interface, it assigns a type identifier to each
IDL type it encounters. For each interface registered with it, the interface repository
provides a mapping between the type identifier of that interface and the interface itself.
Thus, the type identifier of an interface is sometimes called the repository ID because it
may be used as a key to IDL interfaces registered in the interface repository.


===== page 369 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 351
Every CORBA remote object reference includes a slot that contains the type
identifier of its interface, enabling clients that hold it to enquire its type of the interface
repository. Those applications that use static (ordinary) invocation with client proxies
and IDL skeletons do not require an interface repository. Not all ORBs provide an
interface repository.
Dynamic invocation interface • As suggested in Section 5.5, in some applications it
may be necessary to construct a client program without knowing all the proxy classes it
will need in the future. For example, an object browser might need to display
information about all the CORBA objects available in the various servers in a distributed
system. It is not feasible for such a program to include proxies for all of these objects,
particularly as new objects may be added to the system as time passes. CORBA does not
allow classes for proxies to be downloaded at runtime, as in Java RMI. The dynamic
invocation interface is CORBA’s alternative.
The dynamic invocation interface allows clients to make dynamic invocations on
remoteCORBA objects. It is used when it is not practical to employ proxies. The client
can obtain from the interface repository the necessary information about the methods
available for a given CORBA object. The client may use this information to construct
an invocation with suitable arguments and send it to the server.
Dynamic skeletons • Again, as explained in Section 5.5, it may be necessary to add to
a server a CORBA object whose interface was unknown when the server was compiled.
If a server uses dynamic skeletons, then it can accept invocations on the interface of a
CORBA object for which it has no skeleton. When a dynamic skeleton receives an
invocation, it inspects the contents of the request to discover its target object, the method
to be invoked and the arguments. It then invokes the target.
Legacy code • The term legacy code refers to existing code that was not designed with
distributed objects in mind. A piece of legacy code may be made into a CORBA object
by defining an IDL interface for it and providing an implementation of an appropriate
object adapter and the necessary skeletons.
8.3.3 CORBA remote object references
CORBA specifies a format for remote object references that is suitable for use whether
or not the remote object is to be activated by an implementation repository. References
using this format are called interoperable object references (IORs). The following
figure is based on Henning [1998], which contains a more detailed account of IORs:
IOR format
IDL interface type ID Protocol and address details Object key
interface repository IIOP host domain port number adapter name object name
identifier or type name
Stepping through the various fields:
(cid:129) The first field of an IOR specifies the type identifier of the IDL interface of the
CORBA object. Note that if the ORB has an interface repository, this type name


===== page 370 =====
352 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
is also the interface repository identifier of the IDL interface, which allows the
IDL definition for the interface to be retrieved at runtime.
(cid:129) The second field specifies the transport protocol and the details required by that
particular transport protocol to identify the server. In particular, the Internet Inter-
ORB protocol (IIOP) uses TCP, in which the server address consists of a host
domain name and a port number [OMG 2004a].
(cid:129) The third field is used by the ORB to identify a CORBA object. It consists of the
name of an object adapter in the server and the object name of a CORBA object
specified by the object adapter.
Transient IORs for CORBA objects last only as long as the process that hosts those
objects, whereas persistent IORs last between activations of the CORBA objects. A
transient IOR contains the address details of the server hosting the CORBA object,
whereas a persistent IOR contains the address details of the implementation repository
with which it is registered. In both cases, the client ORB sends the request message to
the server whose address details are given in the IOR. Here is how the IOR is used to
locate the servant representing the CORBA object in the two cases:
Transient IORs: The server ORB core receives the request message containing the
object adapter name and object name of the target. It uses the object adapter name to
locate the object adapter, which uses the object name to locate the servant.
Persistent IORs: An implementation repository receives the request. It extracts the
object adapter name from the IOR in the request. Provided that the object adapter
name is in its table, it attempts if necessary to activate the CORBA object at the host
address specified in its table. Once the CORBA object has been activated, the
implementation repository returns its address details to the client ORB, which uses
them as the destination for RMI request messages, which include the object adapter
name and the object name. These enable the server ORB core to locate the object
adapter, which uses the object name to locate the servant, as before.
The second field of an IOR may be repeated so as to specify the host domain name and
port number of more than one destination, to allow for an object or an implementation
repository to be replicated at several different locations.
The reply message in the request-reply protocol includes header information that
enables the above procedure for persistent IORs to be carried out. In particular, it
includes a status entry that can indicate whether the request should be forwarded to a
different server, in which case the body of the reply includes an IOR that contains the
address of the server of the newly activated object.
8.3.4 CORBA services
CORBA includes specifications for services that may be required by distributed objects.
In particular, the Naming service is an essential addition to any ORB, as we will see in
our programming example in Section 8.3.5. An index to documentation on all of the
services can be found at OMG’s web site [www.omg.org]. Many of the CORBA
services are described in Orfali et al. [1996, 1997]. A summary of key CORBA Services
is included in Figure 8.6. Further details of such services can be found on the companion
web site [www.cdk5.net/corba].


===== page 371 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 353
Figure 8.6 CORBA Services
CORBA Service Role Further details
Naming service Supports naming in CORBA, in particular mapping names to [OMG 2004b]
remote object references within a given naming context (see
Chapter 9).
Trading service Whereas the Naming service allows objects to be located by [OMG 2000a,
name, the Trading service allows them to be located by Henning and
attribute; that is, it is a directory service. The underlying Vinoski 1999]
database manages a mapping of service types and associated
attributes onto remote object references.
Event service Allows objects of interest to communicate notifications to [Farley 1998,
subscribers using ordinary CORBA remote method OMG 2004c]
invocations (see Chapter 6 for more on event services
generally).
Notification Extends the event service with added capabilities including [OMG 2004d]
service the ability to define filters expressing events of interest and
also to define the reliability and ordering properties of the
underlying event channel.
Security service Supports a range of security mechanisms including [Blakely 1999,
authentication, access control, secure communication, Baker 1997,
auditing and nonrepudiation (see Chapter 11). OMG 2002b]
Transaction Supports the creation of both flat and nested transactions (as [OMG 2003]
service defined in Chapters 16 and 17).
Concurrency Uses locks to apply concurrency control to the access of [OMG 2000b]
control service CORBA objects (may be used via the transaction service or as
an independent service).
Persistent state Offers a persistent object store for CORBA, used to save and [OMG 2002d]
service restore the state of CORBA objects (implementations are
retrieved from the implementation repository).
Lifecycle service Defines conventions for creating, deleting, copying and [OMG 2002e]
moving CORBA objects; for example, how to use factories to
create objects.
8.3.5 CORBA client and server example
This section outlines the steps necessary to produce client and server programs that use
the IDL Shape and ShapeList interfaces shown in Figure 8.2. This is followed by a
discussion of callbacks in CORBA. We use Java as the client and server languages, but
the approach is similar for other languages. The interface compiler idlj can be applied to
the CORBA interfaces to generate the following items:
(cid:129) The equivalent Java interfaces – two per IDL interface. The name of the first Java
interface ends in Operations – this interface just defines the operations in the IDL
interface. The second Java interface has the same name as the IDL interface and


===== page 372 =====
354 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.7 Java interfaces generated by idlj from CORBA interface ShapeList
public interface ShapeListOperations {
Shape newShape(GraphicalObject g) throws ShapeListPackage.FullException;
Shape[] allShapes();
int getVersion();
}
public interface ShapeList extends ShapeListOperations, org.omg.CORBA.Object,(cid:3)
org.omg.CORBA.portable.IDLEntity { }
implements the operations in the first interface as well as those in an interface
suitable for a CORBA object. For example, the IDL interface ShapeList results in
the two Java interfaces ShapeListOperations and ShapeList, as shown in Figure
8.7.
(cid:129) The server skeletons for each idl interface. The names of skeleton classes end in
POA – for example, ShapeListPOA.
(cid:129) The proxy classes or client stubs, one for each IDL interface. The names of these
classes end in Stub – for example, _ShapeListStub.
(cid:129) A Java class to correspond to each of the structs defined with the IDL interfaces.
In our example, classes Rectangle and GraphicalObject are generated. Each of
these classes contains a declaration of one instance variable for each field in the
corresponding struct and a pair of constructors, but no other methods.
(cid:129) Classes called helpers and holders, one for each of the types defined in the IDL
interface. A helper class contains the narrow method, which is used to cast down
from a given object reference to the class to which it belongs, which is lower down
the class hierarchy. For example, the narrow method in ShapeHelper casts down to
classShape. The holder classes deal with out and inout arguments, which cannot be
mapped directly onto Java. See Exercise 8.9 for an example of the use of holders.
Server program • The server program should contain implementations of one or more
IDL interfaces. For a server written in an object-oriented language such as Java or C++,
these interfaces are implemented as servant classes. CORBA objects are instances of
servant classes.
When a server creates an instance of a servant class, it must register it with the
POA, which makes the instance into a CORBA object and gives it a remote object
reference. Unless this is done, the CORBA object will not be able to receive remote
invocations. Readers who studied Chapter 5 carefully may realize that registering the
object with the POA causes it to be recorded in the CORBA equivalent of the remote
object table.
In our example, the server contains implementations of the interfaces Shape and
ShapeList in the form of two servant classes, together with a server class that contains
aninitialization section (see Section 5.4.2) in its main method:
The servant classes: Each servant class extends the corresponding skeleton class and
implements the methods of an IDL interface using the method signatures defined in


===== page 373 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 355
Figure 8.8 ShapeListServant class of the Java server program for CORBA interface ShapeList
import org.omg.CORBA.*;
import org.omg.PortableServer.POA;
class ShapeListServant extends ShapeListPOA {
private POA theRootpoa;
private Shape theList[];
private int version;
private static int n=0;
public ShapeListServant(POA rootpoa){
theRootpoa = rootpoa;
// initialize the other instance variables
}
public Shape newShape(GraphicalObject g) throws ShapeListPackage.FullException { 1
version++;
Shape s = null;
ShapeServant shapeRef = new ShapeServant( g, version);
try {
org.omg.CORBA.Object ref = theRootpoa.servant_to_reference(shapeRef); 2
s = ShapeHelper.narrow(ref);
} catch (Exception e) {}
if(n >=100) throw new ShapeListPackage.FullException();
theList[n++] = s;
return s;
}
public Shape[] allShapes(){ ... }
public int getVersion() { ... }
}
the equivalent Java interface. The servant class that implements the ShapeList
interface is named ShapeListServant, although any other name could have been
chosen. Its outline is shown in Figure 8.8. Consider the method newShape in line 1,
which is a factory method because it creates Shape objects. To make a Shape object
a CORBA object, it is registered with the POA by means of its servant_to_reference
method, as shown in line 2, which makes use of the reference to the root POA that
was passed on via the constructor when the servant was created. Complete versions
of the IDL interface and the client and server classes in this example are available at
www.cdk5.net/corba.
The server: Themain method in the server class ShapeListServer is shown in Figure
8.9.Itfirstcreates and initializes the ORB (line 1), then gets a reference to the root
POA and activates the POAManager (lines 2 & 3). Then it creates an instance of
ShapeListServant, which is just a Java object (line 4), and in doing this passes on a
reference to the root POA. It then makes it into a CORBA object by registering it with
the POA (line 5). After this, it registers the server with the Naming service. It then
waits for incoming client requests (line 10).


===== page 374 =====
356 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.9 Java class ShapeListServer
import org.omg.CosNaming.*;
import org.omg.CosNaming.NamingContextPackage.*;
import org.omg.CORBA.*;
import org.omg.PortableServer.*;
public class ShapeListServer {
public static void main(String args[]) {
try{
ORB orb = ORB.init(args, null); 1
POA rootpoa = POAHelper.narrow(orb.resolve_initial_references("RootPOA")); 2
rootpoa.the_POAManager().activate(); 3
ShapeListServant SLSRef = new ShapeListServant(rootpoa); 4
org.omg.CORBA.Object ref = rootpoa.servant_to_reference(SLSRef); 5
ShapeList SLRef = ShapeListHelper.narrow(ref);
org.omg.CORBA.Object objRef = orb.resolve_initial_references("NameService");
NamingContext ncRef = NamingContextHelper.narrow(objRef); 6
NameComponent nc = new NameComponent("ShapeList", ""); 7
NameComponent path[] = {nc}; 8
ncRef.rebind(path, SLRef); 9
orb.run(); 10
} catch (Exception e) { ... }
}
}
A server using the Naming service first gets a root naming context using the
NamingContextHelper (line 6). The naming context defines the scope within which
a set of names apply (each of the names within a context must be unique). The server
then makes a NameComponent (line 7), with the NameComponent being an object
representing a name in CORBA. This has two parts, a name and a kind; the kind field
is purely descriptive (the field is used by applications and is not interpreted by the
Naming service). Names can be compound and represented by a path to the object in
the naming graph. In this example, compound naming is not used; rather, the path
consists of a single name as defined in line 8. Finally, the server uses the rebind
method of the Naming service (line 9), which registers the name and remote object
reference pair in the appropriate context. Clients carry out the same steps but use the
resolve method as shown in Figure 8.10, line 2.
The client program • An example client program is shown in Figure 8.10. It creates and
initializes an ORB (line 1), then contacts the Naming service to get a reference to the
remote ShapeList object by using its resolve method (line 2). After that it invokes its
allShapes method (line 3) to obtain a sequence of remote object references to all the
Shapes currently held at the server. It then invokes the getAllState method (line 4),
giving as its argument the first remote object reference in the sequence returned; the
result is supplied as an instance of the GraphicalObject class.


===== page 375 =====
SECTION 8.3 CASE STUDY: CORBA 357
Figure 8.10 Java client program for CORBA interfaces Shape and ShapeList
import org.omg.CosNaming.*;
import org.omg.CosNaming.NamingContextPackage.*;
import org.omg.CORBA.*;
public class ShapeListClient{
public static void main(String args[]) {
try{
ORB orb = ORB.init(args, null); 1
org.omg.CORBA.Object objRef =
orb.resolve_initial_references("NameService");
NamingContext ncRef = NamingContextHelper.narrow(objRef);
NameComponent nc = new NameComponent("ShapeList", "");
NameComponent path [] = { nc };
ShapeList shapeListRef =
ShapeListHelper.narrow(ncRef.resolve(path)); 2
Shape[] sList = shapeListRef.allShapes(); 3
GraphicalObject g = sList[0].getAllState(); 4
} catch(org.omg.CORBA.SystemException e) {...} 5
}
}
The getAllState method seems to contradict our earlier statement that objects
cannot be passed by value in CORBA, because both client and server deal in instances
of the class GraphicalObject. However, there is no contradiction: the CORBA object
returns a struct, and clients using a different language might see it differently. For
example, in the C++ language the client would see it as a struct. Even in Java, the
generated class GraphicalObject is more like a struct because it has no methods.
Client programs should always catch CORBA SystemExceptions, which report on
errors due to distribution (see line 5). Client programs should also catch the exceptions
defined in the IDL interface, such as the FullException thrown by the newShape method.
This example illustrates the use of the narrow operation: the resolve operation of
the Naming service returns a value of type Object, and this type is narrowed to suit the
particular type required – (ShapeList).
Callbacks • Callbacks can be implemented in CORBA in a manner similar to the one
described for Java RMI in Section 5.5.1. For example, the WhiteboardCallback
interface may be defined as follows:
interface WhiteboardCallback {
oneway void callback(in int version);
};
This interface is implemented as a CORBA object by the client, enabling the server to
send the client a version number whenever new objects are added. But before the server
can do this, the client needs to inform the server of the remote object reference of its


===== page 376 =====
358 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
object. To make this possible, the ShapeList interface requires additional methods such
asregister and deregister, as follows:
int register(in WhiteboardCallback callback);
void deregister(in int callbackId);
After a client has obtained a reference to the ShapeList object and created an instance of
WhiteboardCallback, it uses the register method of ShapeList to inform the server that
it is interested in receiving callbacks. The ShapeList objectin the server is responsible
for keeping a list of interested clients and notifying all of them each time its version
number increases when a new object is added. The callback method is declared as
oneway so that the server may use asynchronous calls to avoid delay as it notifies each
client.
8.4 From objects to components
Distributed object middleware has been heavily deployed in a wide range of
applications, including the areas featured in Chapter 1: finance and commerce,
healthcare, education, transport and logistics and so on. The techniques incorporated in
CORBA and related platforms have proved to be successful in tackling many of the key
issues associated with distributed programming, especially related to resolving
heterogeneity and enabling portability and interoperability of distributed systems
software. The range of services that accompany such platforms also encourage the
development of software that is secure and reliable.
However, a number of shortcomings have been identified. This has led to the
emergence of what we shall define to be component-based approaches, as a natural
evolution from distributed object computing. This section charts this transition,
discussing the requirements that led to component-based approaches and provides a
definition of components before examining in more depth the styles of component-
based approaches adopted in distributed systems. This is followed by Section 8.5 which
presents two contrasting case studies of component technologies, Enterprise JavaBeans
and Fractal.
Issues with object-oriented middleware • As mentioned above, component-based
approaches emerged to tackle the problems identified with distributed object computing.
The problems were listed in Section 8.1 and are discussed in more detail below.
Implicit dependencies: A distributed object offers a contract to the outside world in terms
of the interface (or interfaces) it offers to the distributed environment. The contract
represents a binding agreement between the provider of the object and users of that
object in terms of its expected behaviour. It is often assumed that such interfaces provide
a complete contract for the deploying and use of this object. However, this is not the
case. The problem arises from the fact that the internal (encapsulated) behaviour of an
object is hidden. For example, an object may communicate with another object or
associated distributed system service through a remote method invocation or other
communication paradigm. If we look back at the CORBA server and client programs
shown in Figure 8.9 and Figure 8.10, respectively, we see that the server issues a


===== page 377 =====
SECTION 8.4 FROM OBJECTS TO COMPONENTS 359
callback to the client, but this is not apparent from the interface defined on the server.
Also, while both the client and the server communicate with the name service, again this
is not visible from the external view of that object (as offered by the interfaces).
More generally, a given object can make arbitrary calls to other application-level
objects or to distributed system services offering naming, persistence, concurrency
control, transactions, security and so on, and this is not captured in the external view of
the configuration. Implicit dependencies in the distributed configuration make it
difficult to ensure the safe composition of a configuration, to replace one object with
another, and for third-party developers to implement one particular element in a
distributed configuration.
Requirement: From this, there is a clear requirement to specify not only the
interfaces offered by an object but also the dependencies that object has on other
objects in the distributed configuration.
Interaction with the middleware: Despite the goals of transparency, it is clear that in using
distributed object middleware the programmer is exposed to many relatively low-level
details associated with the middleware architecture. Again, the client-server example
shown in Figures 8.9 and 8.10 provides an illustration of this. Despite this being a rather
simple application, there are many CORBA-related calls that are absolutely essential to
the operation of the application. These include calls associated with naming (as
mentioned above), with the POA and to the ORB core. In more complex examples, this
could include arbitrarily sophisticated code in terms of the creation and management of
object references, management of object lifecycles, activation and passivation policies,
management of persistent state and policies for mappings to underlying platform
resources such as threads. All of this can very quickly become a distraction from the
main purpose of the code, which is to create a particular application. This is all too
evident from the example cited above, where the actual code related to the whiteboard
application is minimal and interleaved with code related to distributed systems concerns.
Requirement: There is a clear need to simplify the programming of distributed
applications, to present a clean separation of concerns between code related to
operation in a middleware framework and code associated with the application, and
to allow the programmer to focus exclusively on the latter.
Lack of separation of distribution concerns: Programmers using distributed object
middleware also have to deal explicitly with non-functional concerns related to issues
such as security, transactions, coordination and replication. In technologies such as
CORBA and RMI, this is achieved by inserting appropriate calls to the associated
distributed system services within the objects. This has two repercussions:
(cid:129) Programmers must have an intimate knowledge of the full details of all the
associated distributed system services.
(cid:129) The implementation for a given object will contain application code alongside
calls to distributed system services and to the underlying middleware interfaces
(as mentioned above). The resultant tangling of concerns further increases the
complexity of distributed systems programming.


===== page 378 =====
360 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Requirement: The separation of concerns alluded to above should extend also to
dealing with the full range of distributed system services, and the complexities of
dealing with such services should be hidden wherever possible from the programmer.
No support for deployment: While technologies such as CORBA and Java RMI make it
possible to develop arbitrary distributed configurations of objects, there is no support for
the deployment of such configurations. Rather, objects must be deployed manually on
individual machines. This can become a tiresome and error-prone process, particularly
with large-scale deployments consisting of many objects spread over a physical
architecture with a large number of (potentially heterogeneous) nodes. In addition to
physically placing the objects, objects must also be activated and appropriate bindings
created to other objects. Because of the lack of support for deployment, developers
inevitably resort to ad hoc strategies for deployment, which are then not portable to other
environments.
Requirement: Middleware platforms should provide intrinsic support for
deployment so that distributed software can be installed and deployed in the same
way as software for a single machine, with the complexities of deployment hidden
from the user.
These four requirements have led to the emergence of component-based approaches to
distributed systems development, alongside the emergence of component-based
middleware, including the style of middleware referred to as application servers.
Note that although component-based approaches have only gained importance in
recent years, their roots can be traced back to earlier projects addressing reconfiguration
in distributed systems (such as the Conic Project at Imperial College London [Magee
and Sloman 1989]).
Essence of components • For the purposes of this discussion, we adopt the definition of
components provided by Szyperski in his book on component software [Szyperski
2002]:
Components: A software component is a unit of composition with contractually
specified interfaces and explicit context dependencies only.
In this classic definition, the word ‘only’ refers to the fact that any context dependencies
must be explicit – that is, there are no implicit dependencies present.
Software components are like distributed objects in that they are encapsulated
units of composition, but a given component specifies both its interfaces provided to the
outside world and its dependencies on other components in the distributed environment.
The dependencies are also represented as interfaces. More specifically, a component is
specified in terms of a contract, which includes:
(cid:129) a set of provided interfaces – that is, interfaces that the component offers as
services to other components;
(cid:129) a set of required interfaces – that is, the dependencies that this component has in
terms of other components that must be present and connected to this component
for it to function correctly.
In a given component configuration, every required interface must be bound to a
provided interface of another component. This is also referred to as a software


===== page 379 =====
SECTION 8.4 FROM OBJECTS TO COMPONENTS 361
Figure 8.11 An example software architecture
Directory service Required interface
Provided interface
Flat file service
File service
Block module Device module
architecture consisting of components, interfaces and connections between interfaces.
We can see an example of such a configuration in Figure 8.11. This example shows the
architecture of a simple file system providing an interface to other users and in turn
requiring connection to a directory service component and a flat file service component.
The figure also shows additional connections to block and device modules, capturing the
overall architecture of this particular file system. (We will investigate the actual
architectures of distributed file systems in Chapter 12.)
Interfaces may be of different styles. In particular, many component-based
approaches offer two styles of interface:
(cid:129) interfaces supporting remote method invocation, as in CORBA and Java RMI;
(cid:129) interfaces supporting distributed events (as discussed in Chapter 6).
We will see examples of both styles of interface when we look at Enterprise JavaBeans
in Section 8.5.1.
Programming in component-based systems is concerned with the development of
components and their composition. The goal is to support a style of software
development that parallels hardware development in using off-the-shelf components
and composing them together to develop more sophisticated services: a move from
software development to software assembly. This approach therefore supports third-
party development of software components and also makes it easier to adapt system
configurations at runtime, by replacing one component with another that is a precise
match in terms of provided and required interfaces.
Note that advocates of component-based approaches place significant emphasis
on this use of composition and see this as the cleanest approach to constructing complex
software systems. In particular, they advocate composition over inheritance, viewing
inheritance as creating additional forms of implicit dependency (this time between


===== page 380 =====
362 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.12 The structure of a container
Lifecycle interface
External (provided)
Calls to external
interfaces distributed system
services
Components
Interception
Incoming invocations
classes). This can lead to issues such as the fragile base class problem, where changes
to a base class may have unforeseen repercussions for other objects further down the
inheritance hierarchy [Szyperski 2002].
So far, we have addressed the first requirement highlighted above (in terms of
making all dependencies explicit), but not the next three, which refer to simplifying the
development and deployment of distributed applications. This further level of support
will become apparent when we examine how component-based approaches have
evolved in the distributed systems community.
Components and distributed systems • A range of component-based middleware
technologies have emerged, including Enterprise JavaBeans (discussed in Section 8.5.1
below) and the CORBA Component Model (CCM) [Wang et al. 2001], an evolution of
CORBA from an object-based to a component-based platform. Component-based
middleware builds on the philosophy captured above but also adds significant support
for distributed systems development and deployment, as discussed below.
Containers: The concept of containers is absolutely central to component-based
middleware. Containers support a common pattern often encountered in distributed
applications, which consists of:
(cid:129) afront-end (perhaps web-based) client;
(cid:129) a container holding one or more components that implement the application or
business logic;
(cid:129) systemservices that manage the associated data in persistent storage.
(This is analogous to thethree-tier model described in Section 2.3.2.)
The tasks of the container are to provide a managed server-side hosting
environment for components and to provide the necessary separation of concerns
alluded to above, where components deal with application concerns and the container


===== page 381 =====
SECTION 8.4 FROM OBJECTS TO COMPONENTS 363
Figure 8.13 Application servers
Technology Developed by Further details
WebSphere Application Server IBM [www.ibm.com]
Enterprise JavaBeans SUN [java.sun.com XII]
Spring Framework SpringSource [www.springsource.org]
(a division of VMware)
JBoss JBoss Community [www.jboss.org]
CORBA Component Model OMG [Wang et al. 2001]
JOnAS OW2 Consortium [jonas.ow2.org]
GlassFish SUN [glassfish.dev.java.net]
deals with distributed systems and middleware issues, ensuring that non-functional
properties are achieved. The overall structure of a container is shown in Figure 8.12.
This shows a number of components encapsulated within a container; the container
does not provide direct access to the components but rather intercepts incoming
invocations and then takes appropriate actions to ensure the desired properties of the
distributed application are maintained. If we take the case of CORBA, for example, this
would include:
(cid:129) managing the interaction with the underlying ORB core and POA functionality
and hiding this entirely from application developers;
(cid:129) managing calls to appropriate distributed system services, including security and
transaction services, to provide the required non-functional properties of the
application, again transparently to the programmer.
Taken together, this can significantly simplify the development of distributed
applications, allowing the component developer to focus exclusively on application-
level concerns. For example, with a container approach, all the POA-related calls
featured in Figures 8.8 and 8.9 would be made by the container and not by the
component. Similarly, through the interception mechanism, the container can issue a
potentially complex sequence of calls to appropriate distributed system services to
implement the required non-functional properties. As an illustration of the latter point,
consider the implementation of a simple management policy to deal with concurrent
access to a component. This can be implemented in a manner that is transparent to the
component by intercepting the incoming invocation at the external interface, acquiring
a lock associated with the underlying component and then proceeding with the call on
the underlying operation on the component itself, ensuring the lock is released when the
invocation is completed (we will talk more about locks in Section 16.4, but for now a
general understanding will suffice).
Middleware that supports the container pattern and the separation of concerns
implied by this pattern is known as an application server. This style of distributed
programming is in widespread use in industry today. A wide range of application servers
are now available; a summary of the key approaches is presented in Figure 8.13. Section
8.5.1 examines the Enterprise JavaBeans specification as an example of an application
server.


===== page 382 =====
364 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Support for deployment: Component-based middleware provides support for the
deployment of component configurations; releases of software are packaged as software
architectures (components and their interconnections) together with deployment
descriptors that fully describe how the configurations should be deployed in a
distributed environment.
Note that components are deployed into containers, and deployment descriptors
are interpreted by containers to establish the required policies for the underlying
middleware and distributed system services. A given container therefore includes a
number of components that require the same configuration in terms of distributed
system support.
Deployment descriptors are typically written in XML and include sufficient
information to ensure that:
(cid:129) components are correctly connected using appropriate protocols and associated
middleware support;
(cid:129) the underlying middleware and platform are configured to provide the right level
of support to the component configuration (for example, in CORBA, this would
include configuring the POA);
(cid:129) the associated distributed system services are set up to provide the right level of
security, transaction support and so on.
Tools are also provided to interpret the deployment descriptors and ensure the correct
deployment in a given physical architecture.
8.5 Case studies: Enterprise JavaBeans and Fractal
The advantage of application servers is that they provide comprehensive support for one
style of distributed programming – the three-tier approach as explained above – and
most of the complexities associated with distributed programming are hidden from the
user. The disadvantages are that the approach is both prescriptive and heavyweight:
prescriptive in the sense that the approach mandates that particular style of systems
architecture and heavyweight in that application servers are large and complex software
systems that inevitably carry an overhead in terms of performance and resource
requirements. The approach works best on high-end server machines.
To counter this, a more stripped-down and minimal style of component
programming is also adopted in distributed systems. We refer to this style as lightweight
component models to distinguish them from the much more heavyweight application
server architectures. In this section, we present two case studies of component
technologies: Enterprise JavaBeans, a leading example of the application server
approach, and Fractal, an example of a lightweight component architecture.
8.5.1 Enterprise JavaBeans
Enterprise JavaBeans (EJB) [java.sun.com XII] is a specification of a server-side,
managed component architecture and a major element of the Java Platform, Enterprise
Edition (Java EE), a set of specifications for client-server programming. Other


===== page 383 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 365
specifications include Java RMI and JMS, as featured elsewhere in this book (in
Chapters 5 and 6, respectively).
EJB is defined as a server-side component model because it supports the
development of the classic style of application, where potentially large numbers of
clients interact with a number of services realized through components or configuration
of components. The components, which are known as beans in EJB, are intended to
capture the application (or business) logic, as defined in Chapter 2, with EJB also
supporting the separation between this application logic and its persistent storage in a
back-end database. In other words, EJB provides direct support for the three-tier
architecture introduced in Section 2.3.2.
EJB is managed in the sense that the container pattern introduced above (in
Section 8.4) is used to provide support for key distributed systems services including
transactions, security and lifecycle support. Typically, the container injects appropriate
calls to the associated services to provide the required properties, and the use of a
transaction manager or security services is completely hidden from the developer of the
associated beans (container-managed). It is also possible for the bean developer to take
more control over these operations (bean-managed).
The goal of EJB is to maintain a strong separation of concerns between the various
roles involved in developing distributed applications. The EJB specification identifies
the following key roles:
(cid:129) thebean provider, who develops the application logic of the component(s);
(cid:129) theapplication assembler, who assembles beans into application configurations;
(cid:129) the deployer, who takes a given application assembly and ensures it can be
correctly deployed in a given operational environment;
(cid:129) the service provider, who is a specialist in fundamental distributed system
services such as transaction management and establishes the desired level of
support in these areas;
(cid:129) the persistence provider, who is a specialist in mapping persistent data to
underlying databases and in managing these relationships at runtime;
(cid:129) thecontainer provider, who builds on the above two roles and is responsible for
correctly configuring containers with the required level of distributed systems
support in terms of non-functional properties related to, for example, transactions
and security as well as the desired support for persistence;
(cid:129) the system administrator, who is responsible for monitoring a deployment at
runtime and making any adjustments to ensure its correct operation.
Note that EJB is a heavyweight component architecture in the sense introduced above.
There is significant software complexity, particularly associated with the management
of containers. As such, the approach is prescriptive and intended for certain classes of
application only. As mentioned above, EJB is particularly suited to applications that
follow the three-tier architecture based on a back-end database accessed via a service
interface offered by the middle tier (the application logic). For example, this style of
architecture is common in many eCommerce applications where the database maintains
information on stock items, prices and availability, while the middle tier offers


===== page 384 =====
366 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
interfaces to browse the stock and purchase selected items. These are typically large and
complex systems that require support in terms of distributed system services, and hence
the overhead associated with container management is fully justified. We will use the
example of an eShop throughout this section as motivation and to illustrate the use of
EJB in this setting. Other classes of application will not follow this pattern, and hence
EJB is an inappropriate technology for such applications. Examples include peer-to-peer
structures that simply do not follow this tiered model and more lightweight applications
running on embedded devices where the overhead of EJB cannot be justified.
In this section, we focus on the features of EJB 3.0 [java.sun.com XII], released
in 2006. A very large number of implementations of EJB 3.0 are available both
commercially and from open source consortia. Leading examples include Spring, JBoss,
JOnAS and GlassFish.
The EJB component model • A bean in EJB is a component offering one or more
business interfaces to potential clients of that component, where interfaces can be either
remote, requiring the use of appropriate communication middleware (such as RMI or
JMS), or local, in which case more direct, and hence efficient, bindings are possible.
Relating back to the terminology introduced in Section 8.4, a business interface is
equivalent to a provided interface (we will see how EJB supports required interfaces
below, in the subsection on dependency injection). A given bean is represented by the
set of remote and local business interfaces together with an associated bean class that
implements the interfaces. Two main styles of bean are supported in the EJB 3.0
specification:
Session beans: A session bean is a component implementing a particular task within
the application logic of a service, for example to make a purchase in our eShop
application. A session bean persists for the duration of a service and maintains a
running conversation with the client for the duration of the session. Session beans can
be either stateful, maintaining associated conversational state (such as the current
status of the eCommerce transaction), or stateless, in which case no state is
maintained. Stateful session beans imply a conversation with a single client and
maintain the state of that conversation. In contrast, stateless beans can have many
concurrent conversations with different clients. The state associated with stateful
beans may or may not be persistent, as we discuss below.
Message-driven beans: Clients interact with session beans using local or remote
invocation. We have seen throughout this book that other communication paradigms
are also important for distributed systems development, including indirect
communication paradigms. The concept of a message-driven bean was introduced in
EJB 2.0 to support indirect communication and, in particular, the possibility to
interact with components using either message queues or topics, building directly on
the functionality offered by JMS (remember that both queues and topics are first-
class entities in JMS representing alternative intermediaries for messages – see
Section 6.4.3). In a message-drive bean, a business interface will be realized as a
listener-style interface reflecting the event-driven nature of the associated bean.
POJOs and annotations • The task of programming in EJB has been simplified
significantly through the use of Enterprise JavaBeanPOJOs (plain old Java objects)
together with Java Enterprise JavaBean annotations. A bean (that is the implementation


===== page 385 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 367
of the bean’s business interfaces) is a plain old Java object: it consists of the application
logic written simply in Java with no other code relating to it being a bean. Annotations
are then used to ensure the correct behaviour in the EJB context. In other words, a bean
is a POJO supplemented by annotations.
Annotations were introduced in Java 1.5 as a mechanism for associating metadata
with packages, classes, methods, parameters and variables. This metadata can then be
used by frameworks to ensure the right behaviour or interpretation is associated with
that part of the program. As an example, annotations are used to introduce a bean of a
particular style. For example, the following are examples of annotated bean definitions
(representing the main styles of bean in EJB 3.0):
@Stateful public class eShop implements Orders {...}
@Stateless public class CalculatorBean implements Calculator {...}
@MessageDriven public class SharePrice implements MessageListener {...}
Annotations are also used to indicate whether business interfaces are remote (@Remote)
or local (@Local). The following example introduces the Orders interface as a remote
interface and the Calculator interface from the CalculatorBean as a local interface only:
@Remote public interface Orders {...}
@Local public interface Calculator {...}
As will become apparent, annotations are used throughout EJB, providing a
specification of how a program should be interpreted in an EJB context.
In the description that follows we will develop the eShop example as an
illustration of the extensive use of annotations in programming bean objects (in this cas,
a session bean).
Enterprise JavaBean containers in EJB • EJB adopts a container-based approach as
described in Section 8.4. Beans are deployed to containers, and the containers provide
implicit distributed system management using interception. In this way, the container
provides the necessary policies in areas including transaction management, security,
persistence and lifecycle management allowing the bean developer to focus exclusively
on the application logic. Containers must therefore be configured with the necessary
level of support. In the current version, EJB is preconfigured with common default
policies and the developer need only take action if these defaults are insufficient
(referred to as configuration by exception in the specification [java.sun.com XII]).
A significant number of annotations are defined to control the various aspects
mentioned above. We illustrate their use by focusing on Enterprise JavaBean transaction
management and encourage the reader to also look at the EJB 3.0 specifications for
further examples. Transactions will be introduced in Chapters 16 and 17. In outline,
though, their role is to ensure that all objects (or, in this context, components) managed
by a single server (or multiple servers in the case of distributed transactions) remain in
a consistent state in spite of concurrent access from multiple clients and in the event of
server failure. They achieve this by enabling a sequence of operations to be executed
atomically, in that the sequence of operations either completes successfully in a manner
that is free from interference from other concurrent access, or in the presence of a failure
(such as, a server crash), has no effect at all Returning to our eShop example, a
transaction mechanism will ensure, for example, that two concurrent purchases do not
result in a single item being sold twice and that a server crash does not allow the system


===== page 386 =====
368 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
to get into an inconsistent state where an item has been paid for but not assigned to the
purchaser.
The mechanisms to achieve transactions are relatively complex, hence the two
chapters devoted to this area later in the book. Nevertheless, the overall concept is
relatively straightforward, and an intuitive understanding will suffice to understand how
EJB manages transactions. The key thing to bear in mind is that transactions refer to
sequences of operations, and that the sequences must be clearly identified for the
transaction management service to do its job. Transactions in EJB apply equally to any
style of bean, including both session beans and message-driven beans.
The first thing to declare is whether transactions associated with an enterprise
bean should be bean-managed or container-managed. This is achieved by associating the
following annotations with the associated class, respectively:
@TransactionManagement (BEAN)
@TransactionManagement (CONTAINER)
Bean-managed transactions are the most straightforward to understand. In this case, the
bean developer is responsible for explicitly identifying the sequence of operations to be
included within the transaction. This is achieved by explicitly including two methods
from the Java interface javax.transaction.UserTransaction – the User.Transaction.begin
andUserTransaction.commit methods – within the code of the bean. These can be used
at either the client or the server end of an interaction. The following code fragment
illustrates the use of this bean-managed approach in the eShop example:
@Stateful
@TransactionManagement (BEAN)
public class eShop implements Orders {
@Resource javax.transaction.UserTransaction ut;
public void MakeOrder (...) {
ut.begin ();
...
ut.commit ();
}
}
To a certain extent, however, this is against the spirit of the container approach as it
requires the inclusion of transaction-related code within the bean. The alternative,
container-managed transaction, obviates the need for this explicit code by allowing the
container to determine when to start and finish a transaction. This is achieved through
the association of a given demarcation policy with the bean execution. Again, this is
achieved declaratively by associating an appropriate annotation with a given method
within the bean class. For example, consider the following code fragment:
@Stateful public class eShop implements Orders {
...
@TransactionAttribute (REQUIRED)
public void MakeOrder (...) {
...
}
}


===== page 387 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 369
Figure 8.14 Transaction attributes in EJB.
Attribute Policy
REQUIRED If the client has an associated transaction running, execute
within this transaction; otherwise, start a new transaction.
REQUIRES_NEW Always start a new transaction for this invocation.
SUPPORTS If the client has an associated transaction, execute the
method within the context of this transaction; if not, the call
proceeds without any transaction support.
NOT_SUPPORTED If the client calls the method from within a transaction, then
this transaction is suspended before calling the method and
resumed afterwards – that is, the invoked method is excluded
from the transaction.
MANDATORY The associated method must be called from within a client
transaction; if not, an exception is thrown.
NEVER The associated methods must not be called from within a
client transaction; if this is attempted, an exception is
thrown.
This shows the association of the REQUIRED policy with the MakeOrder method. This
policy sates that the associated method must be carried out within a transaction. To
understand this policy, it is necessary to realize that a transaction may be initiated by the
caller or may be the responsibility of the bean itself. The REQUIRED policy starts a new
transaction if necessary – that is, if the caller does not provide a transaction context
indicating the work is already being carried out within a transaction. This and other
policies are summarized in Figure 8.14.
Note that, by default, transactions are container-managed in EJB.
Dependency injection: The example above also illustrates a further important role of
containers: Enterprise JavaBean dependency injection. Dependency injection is a
common pattern in programming whereby a third party, in this case a container, is
responsible for managing and resolving the relationships between a component and its
dependencies (the required interfaces, in the terminology of Section 8.4). In particular,
in EJB 3.0, a component refers to a dependency using an annotation and the container is
responsible for resolving this annotation and ensuring that, at runtime, the associated
attribute refers to the right object. This is typically implemented by the container using
reflection.
For example, in the code fragment above, the @Resource annotation indicates a
dependency of this component on an object implementing the UserTransaction
interface. This simply must exist for the configuration to make sense. Dependency
injection both flags this dependency and ensures that, when the correct component
configuration is deployed, the associated attribute ut refers to the right external resource.


===== page 388 =====
370 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Enterprise JavaBean Interception • The Enterprise JavaBeans specification enables the
programmer to intercept two types of operation on beans in order to alter their default
behaviour:
(cid:129) method calls associated with a business interface;
(cid:129) lifecycle events.
We look at each in turn below.
Interception of methods: This mechanism is used where it is necessary to associate a
particular action or set of actions with an incoming call on a business interface. This
applies equally to incoming invocations on a session bean or incoming events on a
message-driven bean. As we have already seen, interception is used widely in the EJB
architecture to provide implicit management. This allows the application developer to
extend the use of interception to more domain-specific concerns not provided by the
container.
Consider the running example of the eShop. Suppose there is a need within the
eShop to implement logging of all operations carried out in the system, for example for
auditing purposes. Interception allows the programmer to introduce such a service
without changing the application logic contained in the bean. As a second example, the
interception mechanism could be used to prevent certain customers from making
purchases in the eShop (for example, if they have defaulted on previous payments).
There are several ways of associating interceptors with a given bean, including
associating an interception class with a given bean class or individual method (using the
annotation @Interceptors), or associating an interception method with a given class
(using the annotation @AroundInvoke). For the sake of simplicity, we focus on the latter
mechanism and return to our example of an eShop:
@Stateful
public class eShop implements Orders {
public void MakeOrder (...) {
...
}
@AroundInvoke
public Object log(InvocationContext ctx) throws Exception {
System.out.println ("The following method was invoked: " +
ctx.getMethod().getName());
return invocationContext.proceed();
}
}
The annotation @AroundInvoke introduces an interceptor on the eShop bean class. The
interceptor method must have the following syntax:
Object <methodName>(javax.ejb.InvocationContext)
This method is then called whenever any of the business methods are called on eShop.
The associated parameter adds significantly to the capabilities of interceptors by
providing both metadata associated with the invocation being intercepted (for example,
references to the bean, the method invoked and the actual parameters associated with the


===== page 389 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 371
Figure 8.15 Invocation contexts in EJB
Signature Use
public Object getTarget() Returns the bean instance associated with the
incoming invocation or event
public Method getMethod() Returns the method being invoked
public Object[] getParameters() Returns the set of parameters associated with the
intercepted business method
public void setParameters((cid:3) Allows the parameter set to be altered by the
Object[] params) interceptor, assuming type correctness is
maintained
public Object proceed() throws Execution proceeds to next interceptor in the chain
Exception (if any) or the method that has been intercepted
invocation) and also limited capabilities to intercede – that is, to change the parameters
before the method is executed. The last line of the method, the call to proceed, returns
control back to the intercepted method (or to the next interceptor in the chain if more
than one interceptor is defined).
The main methods associated with the invocation context are summarized in
Figure 8.15.
Interception of lifecycle events: A similar mechanism can be used to intercept and react to
lifecycle events associated with a component. In particular, the EJB specification allows
a bean developer to associate interceptors with the creation and deletion of components
using the following annotations, respectively:
@PostConstruct
@PreDestroy
The annotations are associated with given methods in the bean class, with the effect that
these methods will be called when the associated lifecycle events happen. For example,
in the code fragment below from the eShop, TidyUp will be called just before the
component is destroyed:
@Stateful
public class eShop implements Orders {
...
public void MakeOrder (...) { ...}
...
@PreDestroy void TidyUp() { ... }}
}
This annotation is generally used to release any resources currently in use by the eShop
class, for example, open files or sockets associated with the eShop implementation.


===== page 390 =====
372 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Similarly, TidyUp could be used to ensure key data associated with the eShop is written
to the back-end database.
If the bean is stateful, it is also possible to capture activation and passivation
events using @PostActivate and @PrePassivate. Again, this allows key actions to be
taken in association with these lifecycle events – for example, ensuring conversational
state associated with a session is stored in the database before the bean is passivated.
Annotations are used throughout EJB 3.0 to provide a consistent and simple
programming model whereby component developers construct application logic in
POJOs and then decorate this, where appropriate, with additional meta-level annotations
that are interpreted by the container framework.
8.5.2 Fractal
As mentioned above, Fractal is a lightweight component model that brings the benefits
of component-based programming to the development of distributed systems [Bruneton
et al. 2006, fractal.ow2.org I]. Fractal provides support for programming with
interfaces, with the associated benefits in terms of the separation of interface and
implementation (benefits also provided by distributed objects). Fractal goes further,
though, and supports the explicit representation of the software architecture of the
system, avoiding the problem of implicit dependencies discussed in Section 8.4. The
approach is deliberately minimal, with no support for additional component-related
functionality such as deployment, the full container pattern or the enriched
programming model offered by application servers. Fractal is used to construct more
complex software systems (including middleware systems as discussed below) using the
component model as the basic building block, resulting in software that has a clear
component-based architecture and that is configurable and also reconfigurable at
runtime to match the current operational environment and requirements.
Fractal defines a programming model and, as such, is programming
language–agnostic. Implementations of this model are available in several different
languages, including:
(cid:129) Julia and AOKell (Java-based, with the latter also offering support for aspect-
oriented programming);
(cid:129) Cecilia and Think (C-based);
(cid:129) FracNet (.NET-based);
(cid:129) FracTalk (Smalltalk-based);
(cid:129) Julio (Python-based).
Julia and Cecilia are treated as the reference implementations of Fractal.
Fractal is supported by the OW2 consortium [www.ow2.org], an open source
software community for distributed systems middleware that encourages and promotes
the component-based philosophy for the construction of such software. To date, Fractal
has been used in the construction of a wide range of middleware platforms including
Think (a configurable operating system kernel), DREAM (a middleware platform
supporting various forms of indirect communication), Jasmine (a tool supporting the
monitoring and management of SOA platforms), GOTM (offering flexible transaction


===== page 391 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 373
management) and Proactive (a middleware platform for Grid computing). Fractal is also
the basis of the Grid Component Model (GCM), which has been influential in the
development of associated ETSI standards [Baude et al. 2009]. Further details of all
these projects can be found on the OW2 web site [www.ow2.org].
Note that a some other lightweight component models have been developed
specifically for distributed systems. We feature two – OpenCOM and OSGI – in the box
on the next page.
The core component model • A component in Fractal offers one or more interfaces,
with two types of interfaces available:
(cid:129) server interfaces, which support incoming operational invocations (equivalent to
provided interfaces in the terminology of Section 8.4);
(cid:129) client interfaces, which support outgoing invocations (equivalent to required
interfaces).
An interface is an implementation of an interface type, which defines the operations that
are supported by that interface.
Bindings in Fractal: To enable composition, Fractal supports bindings between
interfaces. Two styles of binding are supported by the model:
Primitive bindings: The simplest style of binding is a primitive binding, which is a
direct mapping between one client interface and one server interface within the same
address space, assuming the types are compatible. Primitive bindings can be
implemented efficiently in a given language environment, for example through direct
object references.
Composite bindings:Fractal also supports composite bindings, which are arbitrarily
complex software architectures (that is consisting of components and bindings)
implementing communication between a number of interfaces potentially on
different machines. For example, if you were implementing a CORBA connection in
Fractal, the binding would be composed of components representing the core
architectural elements in CORBA, including proxies, the ORB core, object adapters,
skeletons and servants (mirroring the architecture in Figure 8.5).
Composite bindings are themselves components in Fractal, and this is important
for two reasons:
(cid:129) A system developed using Fractal is fully configurable in terms of the components
and their interconnections. For example, a configuration can be established
wherein components interact using a composite binding implementing any of the
communication paradigms discussed in Chapters 5 and 6 (remote invocation or
indirect, point-to-point or multiparty, and so on). If a given communication
paradigm is not already provided, it can be developed in Fractal and then made
available to future developers as a component.
(cid:129) Once established, any aspect of the software architecture can be reconfigured at
runtime, including composite bindings. It is very useful to be able to adapt
communication structures at runtime, for example to introduce added levels of
security or to alter the implementation to be more scalable as a system grows in
size.


===== page 392 =====
374 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
OpenCOM • OpenCOM [Coulson et al. 2008] is a lightweight component model
with very similar goals to Fractal. OpenCOM is a minimal and open component
model that is designed to be domain– and operating environment–independent; that
is, the component technology is sufficiently flexible to be applied in any context
including demanding areas such as resource-limited wireless sensor networks.
OpenCOM is also designed to offer negligible overhead in terms of performance and
memory requirements, allowing it to be used in situations where performance is
critical – for example, in router implementations.
The overall architecture of OpenCOM consists of a minimal runtime kernel
supporting basic component operations including loading and unloading a
component, and binding components together. This is then enhanced with optional
reflective and platform extensions, which support the dynamic loading of reflective
capabilities and also different models underpinning key platform operations,
including the semantics of loading and binding. The extensions are therefore
conceptually similar to controllers in Fractal.
OpenCOM has been used in the development of a variety of experimental
middleware platforms, including ReMMoC [Grace et al. 2003], which offers service
discovery in highly heterogeneous ubiquitous computing environments (see Chapter
19), and GridKIT [Grace et al. 2008], an experimental, highly configurable and
reconfigurable middleware framework for Grid computing, which also features an
open overlays framework for the construction of arbitrary network virtualizations
including structured and unstructured peer-to-peer overlays.
OSGi • OSGi [www.osgi.org] is a specification of a Java-based middleware
platform managed by the open standards organization, the OSGi Alliance. A number
of implementations of this specification exist, including Equinox, Knopflerfish, Felix
and Concierge. The platform supports the deployment and subsequent lifecycle
management and adaptation of modular software systems organized as
communicatingbundles (similar to components). Bundles communicate through one
or more service interfaces with services published in a service registry, thus
supporting dynamic binding. As the unit of lifecycle management, a given bundle can
be installed, started, activated, stopped and uninstalled. Bundles can also be
dynamically deployed at runtime, and existing bundles updated. OSGi was originally
developed for the programming of service gateways (hence the original name of
Open Service Gateway i) but is now used in a wide variety of application domains,
including in the programming of mobile phones, as middleware for Grid computing
and also as the plug-in architecture in the Eclipse Integrated Development
Environment (IDE), a popular multi-language framework for software development.
OSGi targets the deployment and management of centralized configurations of
software, for example residing on a single device or on a server. A distributed
implementation of OSGI, R-OSGi, has also been developed [Rellermeyer et al.
2007]. This allows software architectures to be distributed at service boundaries
across arbitrary networked configurations. R-OSGi uses the proxy pattern, first
introduced in Chapter 2, to obtain transparent distribution at such boundaries.


===== page 393 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 375
Figure 8.16 An example component configuration in Fractal
cs.ClientServer
r
r s s
Caller Callee
We look in more detail at support for reconfiguration in the subsection on membranes
and controllers below.
Hierarchical composition: The component model is hierarchical in that a component
consists of a series of subcomponents and associated bindings, where the
subcomponents may themselves be composite. For example, the ORB core in the above
example could be further decomposed, given its inherent complexity. Composition is
supported by a Fractal Architectural Description Language (ADL), which we introduce
by a simple example showing the creation of a component containing two
subcomponents that interact in a client-server manner:
<definition name="cs.ClientServer">
<interface name="r" role="server"
signature="java.lang.Runnable" />
<component name="caller" definition="hw.CallerImpl" />
<component name="callee" definition="hw.CalleeImpl" />
<binding client="this.r" server="caller.r" />
<binding client="caller.s" server="callee.s" />
</definition>
Fractal ADL is based on XML. This example shows a component cs.ClientServer with
two subcomponents, caller and callee; bindings are created between the client interface,
this.r (that is, the r interface defined on the containing component cs.ClientServer), and
the associated caller.r interface (the r interface defined on the caller component), and
between the client interface caller.sand the corresponding server interface callee.s. The
associated configuration is illustrated in Figure 8.16.
Fractal also supports sharing, whereby a given component may be shared across
multiple software architectures. The developers of Fractal argue that this is necessary to
faithfully represent system architectures including access to underlying resources that
are fundamentally shared, such as a TCP connection. As a further example, it would be
possible for the callee (the server component) to be shared across multiple
configurations.
Membranes and controllers • In implementation, a component consists of a membrane,
which defines control capabilities associated with the component through a set of
controllers, and also the associated content – the subcomponents (and bindings) that
make up its architecture. Interfaces can be internal to the membrane and hence only


===== page 394 =====
376 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Figure 8.17 The structure of a Fractal component
Control interfaces
Controllers
Client interface
Server interfaces
Content
Membrane
visible to components within the content part, or external and hence visible to any other
components. This structure is illustrated in Figure 8.17.
The membrane concept is crucial to the Fractal approach; a membrane provides a
configurable control regime for the encapsulated set of components (the content). In
other words, the set of controllers defines the control capabilities and associated
semantics for these components. By changing the set of controllers, wealso change the
capabilities.
Controllers can be used for various purposes:
(cid:129) One of the key uses of controllers is to implement lifecycle management,
including operations associated with activation and passivation such as suspend,
resume and checkpoint. For example, Fractal supports a LifeCycleController
supporting three methods, startFc, stopFc and getFcState, which implements
these three functions, respectively. This is crucial in cases where reconfigurations
of the underlying software architecture are being carried out at runtime. Consider
the simple example of the client-server configuration above and suppose the
server is to be replaced dynamically by an enhanced server (perhaps one
supporting multi-threading for improved throughput). In this case, to avoid
inconsistencies, it is helpful to suspend the configuration, replace the callee
component with the new one, and then resume the configuration.
(cid:129) Controllers also offer reflection capabilities (see Chapter 2). In particular,
introspection capabilities are provided through two interfaces, Component and
ContentController, which support introspection (dynamic discovery) of the
interfaces associated with a component and step through the architecture of a
composite component structure respectively. The full interfaces for the two
controllers are shown in Figure 8.18. Introspection is again important to support
dynamic reconfiguration. Returning to our client-server example, it is possible,
through the above interfaces, to discover the precise architecture of the underlying
component configuration (in this case, a simple configuration consisting of two


===== page 395 =====
SECTION 8.5 CASE STUDIES: ENTERPRISE JAVABEANS AND FRACTAL 377
Figure 8.18 Component and ContentController Interfaces in Fractal
public interface Component {
Object[] getFcInterfaces ();
Object getFcInterface (String itfName);
Type getFcType ();
}
public interface ContentController {
Object[] getFcInternalInterfaces ();
Object getFcInterfaceInterface(String itfName);
Component[] getFcSubComponents ();
void addFcSubComponent (Component c);
void removeFcSubComponent(Component c);
}
components) and also to ensure that a replacement callee component supports
precisely the same interface as the old one.
(cid:129) Controllers can be introduced to offer interception capabilities mirroring the
capability offered in EJB and reported in Section 8.5.1 above. Interception is a
powerful mechanism with many uses. In the EJB section, the example is provided
of using interception to implement logging. For example, interception could be
used in the client-server example to log all calls issued by the caller component in
a manner that would be completely transparent to both the caller and callee. A
further use of interception is to implement an access control policy only allowing
an invocation to proceed if a given principal has rights to access a given resource
(see Section 11.2.4).
Having studied the relative roles of membranes and controllers, it is now possible to
relate membranes to containers, as introduced in Section 8.4 and in the EJB case study
above. Membranes, like containers, provide a place for the deployment of components;
both techniques also support implicit distributed systems management, containers by
making implicit calls to distributed systems services and membranes through their
constituent controllers. Membranes, though, are significantly more flexible:
(cid:129) In terms of reflection, support can range from black-box components where
internal structure is hidden, through approaches where limited introspection
capabilities are offered (dynamically discovering interfaces), to advanced
reflection features supporting full introspection and providing inherent support for
subsequent adaptation of internal structures.
(cid:129) In terms of supporting non-functional concerns, at one extreme, membranes can
provide no more than a simple encapsulation of components (if, for example,
minimal controllers are deployed); at the other extreme, they can support fully
fledged distributed systems management of components, including support for
transactions and security as in application servers, but in a completely
configurable and reconfigurable manner.


===== page 396 =====
378 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
Because of this inherent flexibility, Fractal is referred to as a open component model.
A worked example of a complete Fractal implementation can be found in the
online tutorial [fractal.ow2.org II]. This example shows how Fractal can be used to
implement a configurable, minimal HTTP server called Comanche.
8.6 Summary
This chapter has examined the design of complete middleware solutions based around
distributed objects and components. As will now be apparent, they represent a natural
evolution in thinking about such programming abstractions. Distributed objects are
important in terms of bringing the benefits of encapsulation and data abstraction to
distributed systems, and as well as associated tools and techniques from the field of
object-oriented design. Distributed objects therefore represent a significant step forward
from previous approaches based directly on the client-server model. In applying the
distributed object approach, however, a number of significant limitations have emerged
and these have been presented and analyzed in this chapter. In summary, it is often too
complex in practice to use middleware solutions such as CORBA for sophisticated
distributed applications and services, particularly when dealing with advanced
properties of such systems such as, for example, dependability (fault tolerance and
security).
Component technologies overcome these limitations, through their intrinsic
separation of concerns between application logic and distributed systems management.
The explicit identification of dependencies also helps in terms of supporting third party
composition of distributed systems. This chapter examined the EJB 3.0 specification
which has made further steps forward in terms of simplifying distributed systems
development through an approach that emphasizes the use of plain old Java objects with
the complexities managed declaratively through the use of Java annotations. As we saw,
more lightweight technologies such as Fractal and OpenCOM have also been introduced
to bring the benefits of component-based programming to the development of
middleware platforms themselves, with little added overhead in terms of performance.
Component technologies are important for the development of distributed
applications, but like any technology, they have their strengths and weaknesses. For
example, the component approach is quite prescriptive and best suited to applications
that naturally resemble three-tier architectures. To offer a broader perspective on the
range of available middleware platforms, the next two chapters examine alternative
approaches based on the adoption of web-based standards (web services) and peer-to-
peer systems.


===== page 397 =====
EXERCISES 379
EXERCISES
8.1 The Task Bag is an object that stores (key,value) pairs . A key is a string and a value is
a sequence of bytes. Its interface provides the following remote methods:
pairOut, with two parameters through which the client specifies a key and a value to
be stored.
pairIn, whose first parameter allows the client to specify the key of a pair to be
removed from the Task Bag. The value in the pair is supplied to the client via a
second parameter. If no matching pair is available, an exception is thrown.
readPair, which is the same as pairIn except that the pair remains in the Task Bag.
Use CORBA IDL to define the interface of the Task Bag. Define an exception that can
be thrown whenever any one of the operations cannot be carried out. Your exception
should return an integer indicating the problem number and a string describing the
problem. The Task Bag interface should define a single attribute giving the number of
tasks in the bag. page 341
8.2 Define an alternative signature for the methods pairIn and readPair, whose return value
indicates when no matching pair is available. The return value should be defined as an
enumerated type whose values can be ok and wait. Discuss the relative merits of the two
alternative approaches. Which approach would you use to indicate an error such as a key
that contains illegal characters? page 342
8.3 Which of the methods in the Task Bag interface could have been defined as a oneway
operation? Give a general rule regarding the parameters and exceptions of oneway
methods. In what way does the meaning of the oneway keyword differ from the
remainder of IDL? page 342
8.4 The IDL union type can be used for a parameter that will need to pass one of a small
number of types. Use it to define the type of a parameter that is sometimes empty and
sometimes has the type Value. page 345
8.5 In Figure 8.2 the type All was defined as a sequence of fixed length. Redefine this as an
array of the same length. Give some recommendations as to the choice between arrays
and sequences in an IDL interface. page 345
8.6 The Task Bag is intended to be used by cooperating clients, some of which add pairs
(describing tasks) and others of which remove them (and carry out the tasks described).
When a client is informed that no matching pair is available, it cannot continue with its
work until a pair becomes available. Define an appropriate callback interface for use in
this situation. page 357
8.7 Describe the necessary modifications to the Task Bag interface to allow callbacks to be
used. page 357
8.8 Which of the parameters of the methods in the Task Bag interface are passed by value
and which are passed by reference? page 343


===== page 398 =====
380 CHAPTER 8 DISTRIBUTED OBJECTS AND COMPONENTS
8.9 Use the Java IDL compiler to process the interface you defined in Exercise 8.1. Inspect
the definition of the signatures for the methods pairIn and readPair in the generated
Java equivalent of the IDL interface. Look also at the generated definition of the holder
method for the value argument for the methods pairIn and readPair. Now give an
example showing how the client will invoke the pairIn method, explaining how it will
acquire the value returned via the second argument. page 346
8.10 Give an example to show how a Java client will access the attribute giving the number
of tasks in the Task Bag object. In what respects does an attribute differ from an instance
variable of an object? page 345
8.11 Explain why the interfaces to remote objects in general and CORBA objects in
particular do not provide constructors. Explain how CORBA objects can be created in
the absence of constructors. Chapter 5 and page 355
8.12 Redefine the Task Bag interface from Exercise 8.1 in IDL so that it makes use of a struct
to represent a Pair, which consists of a Key and a Value. Note that there is no need to
use a typedef to define a struct. page 345
8.13 Discuss the functions of the implementation repository from the point of view of
scalability and fault tolerance. page 350,page 351
8.14 To what extent may CORBA objects be migrated from one server to another?
page 350,page 351
8.15 Explain carefully how component-based middleware in general and EJB in particular
can overcome the key limitations of distributed object middleware. Provide examples to
illustrate your answer. page 358-364
8.16 Discuss whether the EJB architecture would be suitable to implement a massively
multiplayer online game (an application domain initially introduced in Section 1.2.2).
What would be the strengths and weaknesses of using EJB in this domain? page364
8.17 Would Fractal be a more suitable implementation choice for the MMOG domain?
Justify your answer. page372
8.18 Explain how the container-based philosophy could be adopted to provide migration
transparency for distributed components. page362,362
8.19 How would you achieve the same effect in Fractal? page 375
8.20 Consider the implementation of Java RMI as a composite binding in Fractal. Discuss the
extent to which such a binding can be both configurable and reconfigurable.
Chapter 5, page 373


===== page 399 =====
9
WEB SERVICES
9.1 Introduction
9.2 Web services
9.3 Service descriptions and IDL for web services
9.4 A directory service for use with web services
9.5 XML security
9.6 Coordination of web services
9.7 Applications of web services
9.8 Summary
A web service provides a service interface enabling clients to interact with servers in a
more general way than web browsers do. Clients access the operations in the interface of
a web service by means of requests and replies formatted in XML and usually transmitted
over HTTP. Web services can be accessed in a more ad hoc manner than CORBA-based
services, enabling them to be more easily used in Internet-wide applications.
As with CORBA and Java, the interfaces of web services can be described in an IDL.
But for web services, additional information, including the encoding and communication
protocols in use and the service locations must be provided.
Users require a secure means for creating, storing and modifying documents and
exchanging them over the Internet. The secure channels of Transport Layer Security (TLS,
described in Chapter 9) do not provide all of the necessary requirements. XML security is
intended to bridge this gap.
Web services are increasingly important in distributed systems: they support
interoperability across the global Internet, including the key area of business-to-business
integration and also the emergent ‘mashup’ culture enabling third-party developers to
creative innovative software on top of the existing service base. Web services also provide
the underlying middleware for both the Grid and cloud computing.
381


===== page 400 =====
382 CHAPTER 9 WEB SERVICES
9.1 Introduction
The growth of the Web in the last two decades (see Figure 1.6) proves the effectiveness
of using simple protocols over the Internet as the basis for a large number of wide-area
services and applications. In particular, the HTTP request-reply protocol (Section 5.2),
allows general-purpose clients, called browsers, to view web pages and other resources
with reference to their Uniform Resource Locators (URLs –see the box below for a note
on URIs, URLs and URNs).
However, the use of a general-purpose browser as client, even with the
enhancements provided by downloaded application-specific applets, restricts the
potential scope of applications. In the original client-server model, both client and server
were functionally specialized. Web services return to this model, in which an
application-specific client interacts with a service with a functionally specialized
interface over the Internet.
Thus, web services provide an infrastructure for maintaining a richer and more
structured form of interoperability between clients and servers. They provide a basis
whereby a client program in one organization may interact with a server in another
organization without human supervision. In particular, web services allow complex
applications to be developed by providing services that integrate several other services.
Due to the generality of their interactions, web services cannot be accessed directly by
browsers.
The provision of web services as an addition to web servers is based on the ability
to use an HTTP request to cause the execution of a program. Recall that when a URL in
an HTTP request refers to an executable program, for example, a search, the result is
produced by that program and returned. In a similar way, web services are an extension
of the Web and can be provided by web servers. However, their servers need not be web
servers. The terms ‘web server’ and ‘web services’ should not be confused: a web server
provides a basic HTTP service, whereas a web service provides a service based on the
operations defined in its interface.
External data representation and marshalling of messages exchanged between
clients and web services is done in XML, which is described in Section 4.3.3. To recap,
XML is a textual representation that, although more bulky than alternative
representations, has been adopted for its readability and the consequent ease of
debugging.
The SOAP protocol (Section 9.2.1) specifies the rules for using XML to package
messages, for example to support a request-reply protocol. Figure 9.1 summarizes the
main points about the communication architecture in which web services operate: a web
service is identified by a URI and can be accessed by clients using messages formatted
URI, URL and URN • The Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is a general resource
identifier, whose value may be either a URL or a URN. URLs, which include
resource location information such as the domain name of the server of a resource
being named, are well known to all web users. Uniform Resource Names (URNs) are
location-independent – they rely on a lookup service to map them onto the URLs of
resources. URNs are discussed in more detail in Section 13.1.
