source: Lecture Notes - all Chapterwise\Chapter_8_Security and Challenges in Cloud\LectureNote_Ch _8.pptx
method: pptx
sha256: b468990fc2be4eedf262d1bfbd55bdf3a754f63d291ae439a70b65a86759fb95
pages:  24
ocr:    24 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    600
----------------------------------------------------------------------
----- slide 1 -----
Distributed and Cloud ComputingChapter 8 Security and Challenges in Cloud

----- slide 2 -----
Data Security
Several aspects of data security, including:

Data-in-transit
Confidentiality + integrity using secured protocol
Confidentiality with non-secured protocol and encryption
Data-at-rest
Generally, not encrypted , since data is commingled with other users’ data
Encryption if it is not associated with applications?
indexing and searching?
homomorphic encryption vs. predicate encryption?
Processing of data, including multitenancy
For any application to process data, not encrypted

----- slide 3 -----
Data lineage
Knowing when and where the data was located within cloud is important for audit/compliance purposes
e.g., Amazon AWS 
Store 	<d1, t1, ex1.s3.amazonaws.com> 
Process 	<d2, t2, ec2.compute2.amazonaws.com>
Restore 	<d3, t3, ex2.s3.amazonaws.com>
Data provenance
Computational accuracy (as well as data integrity)
E.g., financial calculation: sum ((((2*3)*4)/6) -2) = $2.00 ?
Correct : assuming US dollar
How about dollars of different countries? 
Correct exchange rate?
Where is (or was) that system located?
What was the state of that physical system?
How would a customer or auditor verify that info?

----- slide 4 -----
Data remanence
Inadvertent disclosure of sensitive information is possible

Provider data and its security: storage
To the extent that quantities of data from many companies are centralized, this collection can become an attractive target for criminals  
Moreover, the physical security of the data centre and the trustworthiness of system administrators take on new importance.

----- slide 5 -----
Identity Access Management (IAM)
IAM is a framework of policies and technologies
Ensures right individuals get right access to right resources
Core functions: Authentication, Authorization, User Management, Policy Enforcement, Auditing

----- slide 6 -----
User on Amazon Cloud
Name
E-mail
Password
Billing Address
Shipping Address
Credit Card
Name
E-mail
Shipping Address
Name
Billing Address
Credit Card
Name
E-mail
Password
Billing Address
Shipping Address
Credit Card
Name
E-mail
Shipping Address
[in the slide picture] ERIC-AN
EXPRESS
Shiver Poweßellet

----- slide 7 -----
Key Functions of IAM
Authentication – Verifies identity (username/password, MFA)
Authorization – Defines permissions and actions
User Management – Manage accounts, groups, roles
Policy Enforcement – Applies security policies
Audit & Compliance – Logs and monitors activities

----- slide 8 -----
Organization’s trust boundary will become dynamic and will move beyond the control and will extend into the service provider domain. 

Managing access for diverse user populations (employees, contractors, partners, etc.) 

Increased demand for authentication
personal, financial, medical data 
software applications hosted in the cloud requires access control

Need for higher-assurance authentication
authentication in the cloud may mean authentication outside firewall
 Limits of password authentication

Need for authentication from mobile devices
Why IAM is Important?

----- slide 9 -----
Data Privacy
The concept of privacy varies widely among (and sometimes within) countries, cultures, and jurisdictions. 
It is shaped by public expectations and legal interpretations; as such, a concise definition is elusive if not impossible. 
Privacy rights or obligations are related to the collection, use, disclosure, storage, and destruction of personal data (or Personally Identifiable Information—PII). 
At the end of the day, privacy is about the accountability of organizations to data subjects, as well as the transparency to an organization’s practice around personal information.
9

----- slide 10 -----
Key Privacy Concerns
Typically mix security and privacy
Some considerations to be aware of:
Storage
Retention
Destruction
Auditing, monitoring and risk management
Privacy breaches
Who is responsible for protecting privacy?
10

----- slide 11 -----
Storage
The aggregation of data raises new privacy issues
Some governments may decide to search through data without necessarily notifying the data owner, depending on where the data resides 
Whether the cloud provider itself has any right to see and access customer data?
Some services today track user behaviour for a range of purposes, from sending targeted advertising to improving services
11

----- slide 12 -----
Retention
How long is personal information (that is transferred to the cloud) retained?
Which retention policy governs the data? 
Does the organization own the data, or the CSP? 
Who enforces the retention policy in the cloud, and how are exceptions to this policy (such as litigation holds) managed?
12

----- slide 13 -----
Destruction
How does the cloud provider destroy PII at the end of the retention period? 
How do organizations ensure that their PII is destroyed by the CSP at the right point and is not available to other cloud users? 
Cloud storage providers usually replicate the data across multiple systems and sites—increased availability is one of the benefits they provide. 
How do you know that the CSP didn’t retain additional copies? 
Did the CSP really destroy the data, or just make it inaccessible to the organization? 
Is the CSP keeping the information longer than necessary so that it can mine the data for its own use?
13

----- slide 14 -----
Auditing, monitoring and risk management
How can organizations monitor their CSP and provide assurance to relevant stakeholders that privacy requirements are met when their PII is in the cloud?
Are they regularly audited?  
What happens in the event of an incident?
If business-critical processes are migrated to a cloud computing model, internal security processes need to evolve to allow multiple cloud providers to participate in those processes, as needed. 
These include processes such as security monitoring, auditing, forensics, incident response, and business continuity
14

----- slide 15 -----
Privacy breaches
How do you know that a breach has occurred?
How do you ensure that the CSP notifies you when a breach occurs?
Who is responsible for managing the breach notification process (and costs associated with the process)?
 If contracts include liability for breaches resulting from negligence of the CSP?
How is the contract enforced?
How is it determined who is at fault?
15

----- slide 16 -----
Data life cycle (in Data Compliance)
16
Personal information should be managed as part of the data used by the organization
Protection of personal information should consider the impact of the cloud on each phase
[in the slide picture] Phase 3
Transfer
Phase 2
Phase 1
Generation
Transformation
Phase 5
Storage
Phase 6
Archival
Phase 7
Destruction

----- slide 17 -----
17
[in the slide picture] Service Level Agreement
service contract with the cloud service provider.
SLAs provide a level of service for each service which is specified in the form of minimum level of service
guaranteed and a target level.
SLAs contain a number of performance metrics and the corresponding service objectives.
service can pursue a profitable service business relationship. It outlines
the broad
understanding between the service provider and the service consumer for conducting business
and forms the basis for maintaining a mutually beneficial relationship. From a legal
perspective, the necessary terms and conditions that bind the service provider to provide
services continually to the service consumer are formally defined in SLA.

----- slide 18 -----
[in the slide picture] Criteria
Asailability
Periormance
Disaster Recovery
Problem resolution
Security and privacy of
Details
Percentage of time the service is guaranteed to be available
Response time, Throughput
Mean time to recover
Process to identify problems, support options, resolution
expectations
Mechanisms for security of data in storage and transmission

----- slide 19 -----
[in the slide picture] LIFE CYCLE OF SLA:
Each SLA goes through a sequence of steps starting from identification of terms and
conditions, activation and monitoring of the stated terms and conditions, and eventual
termination of contract once the hosting relationship ceases to exist. Such a sequence of steps
is called SLA life cycle and consists of the following five phases:
l. Contract definition
2. Publishing and discovery
3. Negotiation
4. Operationalization
5. De-commissioning

----- slide 20 -----
[in the slide picture] Contract Definition. Generally, service providers define a set of service offerings and
corresponding SLAs using standard templates. These service offerings form a catalog.
Individual SLAs for enterprises can be derived by customizing these base SLA templates.
Publication and Discovery. Service provider advertises these base service offerings through
standard publication media, and the customers should be able to locate the service provider
by searching the catalog. The customers can search different competitive offerings and
shortlist a few that fulfill their requirements for further negotiation.
Negotiation. Once the customer has discovered a service provider who can meet their
application hosting need, the SLA terms and conditions needs to be mutually agreed upon
before signing the agreement for hosting the application. For a standard packaged application
which is offered as service, this phase could be automated. For customized applications that
are hosted on cloud platforms, this phase is manual. The service provider needs to analyze the
application's behavior with respect to scalability and performance before agreeing on the
specification of SLA. At the end of this phase, the SLA is mutually agreed by both customer
and provider and is eventually signed off. SLA negotiation can utilize the WS-negotiation

----- slide 21 -----
[in the slide picture] Operationalization. SLA operation consists of SLA monitoring, SLA accounting, and
enforcement. SLA monitoring involves measuring parameter values and calculating
metrics defined as a part of SLA and determining the deviations. On identifying
deviations, the concerned parties are notified. SLA accounting involves capturing
archiving the SLA adherence for compliance.
As part of accounting, the application's actual performance and the performance guaranteed
as a part of SLA is reported. Apart from the frequency and the duration of the SLA breach, it
should also provide the penalties paid for each SLA violation. SLA enforcement involves
taking appropriate action when the runtime monitoring detects a SLA violation. Such actions
could be notifying the concerned parties, charging the penalties besides other things. The
different policies can be expressed using a subset of the Common Information Model (CIM)
The CIM model is an open standard that allows expressing managed elements of data
center via relationships and common objects.
De-commissioning. SLA decommissioning involves termination of all activities performed
under a particular SLA when the hosting relationship between the service provider and the
service consumer has ended. SLA specifies the terms and conditions of contract termination
and specifies situations under which the relationship between a service provider and a service
consumer can be considered to be legally ended.

----- slide 22 -----
[in the slide picture] SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD:
SLA management of applications hosted on cloud platforms involves five phases.
1. Feasibility
2. On-boarding
3. Pre-production
4. Production
5. Termination
Feasibility Analysis
MSP conducts the feasibility study of hosting an application on their cloud platforms. This
study involves three kinds of feasibility: (1) technical feasibility, (2) infrastructure feasibility,
and (3) financial feasibility. The technical feasibility of an application implies determining
the following:
1. Ability of an application to scale out.
2. Compatibility of the application with the cloud platform being used within the MSP's data
center.
3. The need and availability of a specific hardware and software required for hosting and
running of the application.
4. Preliminary information about the application performance and whether they can be met by

----- slide 23 -----
[in the slide picture] On-Boarding of Application
Once the customer and the MSP agree in principle to host the application based on the
findings of the feasibility study, the application is moved from the customer servers to the
hosting platform. Moving an application to the MSP's hosting platform is called on-boarding
[10]. As part of the on-boarding activity, the MSP understands the application runtime
characteristics using runtime profilers. This helps the MSP to identify the possible SLAs that
can be offered to the customer for that application. This also helps in creation of the
necessary policies (also called rule sets) required to guarantee the SLOs mentioned in the
application SLA. The application is accessible to its end users only after the on-boarding
activity is completed.
Preproduction
Once the determination of policies is completed as discussed in previous phase, the
application is hosted in a simulated production environment. It facilitates the customer to
verify and validate the MSP's findings on application's runtime characteristics and agree on
the defined SLA. Once both parties agree on the cost and the terms and conditions of the
SLA, the customer sign-off is obtained. On successful completion of this phase the MSP
allows the application to go on-live.

----- slide 24 -----
[in the slide picture] Production
In this phase, the application is made accessible to its end users under the agreed SLA.
However, there could be situations when the managed application tends to behave differently
cause sustained breach of the terms and conditions mentioned in the SLA. Additionally,
customer may request the MSP for inclusion of new terms and conditions in the SLA. If the
application SLA is breached frequently or if the customer requests for a new non-agreed
SLA, the on-boarding process is performed again. In the case of the former, on-boarding
activity is repeated to analyze the application and its policies with respect to SLA fulfillment.
In case of the latter, a new set of policies are formulated to meet the fresh terms and
conditions of the SLA.
Termination
When the customer wishes to withdraw the hosted application and does not wish to continue
transferred to the customer and only the essential information is retained for legal
compliance. This ends the hosting relationship between the two parties for that application,
and the customer sign-offis obtained.
