source: Lecture Notes - all Chapterwise\Chapter 1 - Introduction to Distributed Systems\Chapter1_Int to Distbd_Sys.pptx
method: pptx
sha256: 46e5da5b813f0d74657d92fbdf0b129754287fa43de97d1cc647f04c9efe320d
pages:  26
ocr:    26 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    600
----------------------------------------------------------------------
----- slide 1 -----
Distributed and Cloud Computing
Khwopa Engineering College 

Lecture presentation by – Er. Avijit Karn

----- slide 2 -----
[in the slide picture] VIRTUAUZED
INFRASTRUCTURE
VIRTUALIZED
INßASTRUUURE
GLOBAL DATA
CONSISTENCY
MULTI-MASTER, CAP
THEOREM SOLUTIONS
& FAULT TOLERANCE
ACTIVE-ACTIVE
REPLICATION
NO SINGLE POINT
OF FAILURE
CLOUD COMPUTING
& HYPERSCALE
aws IA Azure
ON-DEMAND RESOURCE POOLING
NECESSITY & VALUE
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS:
THE BACKBONE OF OUR
CONNECTED PRESENT
REAL-TIME
STREAMING & Al
NETFLIX
Spotify
LOW-LATENCY ANALYTICS
MOBILE EDGE & IoT
PROCESS LOCAL, SAVE BANDWIDTH
DECENTRALIZED WEB
& BLOCKCHAIN
IPFS
% TRUSTLESS, CENSORSHIP-RESISTANT X „

----- slide 3 -----
Chapter 1: Introduction to Distributed Systems
References:
1. G. Coulouris, J. Dollimore and T. Kindberg;  Distributed Systems Concepts and Design,4th Edition.
2. Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Maarten van Steen;  Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms, 3rd Edition.
[notes] Notes to presenter: 
What is your purpose for sharing this reflection?
Is it at the end of a unit or project?  
Are you sharing this reflection, at the attainment of a learning goal you set for yourself?  
Is it at the end of a course?  

State your purpose for the reflection or even the purpose of the learning experience or learning goal.  Be clear and be specific in stating your purpose.

----- slide 4 -----
1.1 Introduction
Tanenbaum defines a distributed system as “a collection of autonomous computing elements that appears to its users as a single coherent system.”
More specifically and precisely defined as “a system in which components located at networked computers communicate and coordinate their actions only by passing messages or ‘message passing’.”
The main characteristics addressed by above definition are 
Concurrency
No presence of Global Clock
Independent Failures
Main motivation for building the DS is to share resources, either hardware or software.
[notes] Notes to presenter: 
Description of what you learned in your own words on one side.
Include information about the topic 
Details about the topic will also be helpful here.  
Tell the story of your learning experience.  Just like a story there should always be a beginning, middle and an end.
On the other side, you can add a graphic that provides evidence of what you learned.

Feel free to use more than one slide to reflect upon your process.  It also helps to add some video of your process.
[in the slide picture] Processor
Memory

----- slide 5 -----
Three Tier Application as Distributed System
[notes] Notes to presenter: 
What did you think at first?
What obstacles did you encounter along the way?
How did you overcome those obstacles?
What images can you add to support your process?

This SmartArt allows you add images and text to help outline your process.  If a picture is worth a thousand words, then pictures and words should help you communicate this reflection on learning perfectly!  You can always click on Insert>SmartArt to change this graphic or select the graphic and click on the Design contextual menu to change the colors.

Feel free to use more than one slide to reflect upon your process.  It also helps to add some video of your process.
[in the slide picture] Presentation tier
The top-most level of the application
is the user interface. The main function
of the interface is to translate tasks
and results to something the user can
understand.
Logic tier
This layer coordinates the
application. processes commands.
makes logical decisions and
evaluations. and performs
calculations. It also moves and
processes data between the two
surrounding layers.
Data tier
Here information is stored and retrieved
from a database or file system. The
information is then passed back to the
eventually back to the user.
>GET SALES
TOTAL
GET LIST OF ALL
SALES MADE
LAST YEAR
QUERY
ADD ALL SALES
TOGETHER
SALE 1
SALE 2
SALE 3
SALE 4
Storage

----- slide 6 -----
1.2 Examples
Web Search
Finance and commerce
Creative industries and entertainment
Healthcare
Education
Transport and Logistics, etc.,
Massive Online multiplayer games
Financial Trading

----- slide 7 -----
1.3 Main Characteristics*
Concurrency
Programs with shared resources run concurrently
Elaborating, enables processes running in different machines to form a common system that is capable of executing codes on multiple machines at the same time.
Helps to reduce latency and increase throughput.
No Global Clock
Synchronization is difficult across remote networks, so there is absence of global clock system.
Only communication through message passing.
Independent Failures
Single site failure doesn’t contribute to whole system.
Provides reliability, resilience, availability to end users.


*----rest in Design Goal Slides

----- slide 8 -----
1.4 Advantages of DS
Economics – cost effective/collection of MPXs offer better  price,
Scalable
Data and Resource (hardware/software) Sharing
Flexibility – spreading workload over connected machines
Communication – speed, reliable, inherent distribution
Availability
Incremental Growth – computing power can be added in small increments

----- slide 9 -----
Disadvantages
Main concern is Security, all the connections and nodes must be secured
Chances of loss of data while movement across nodes
Complexity in developing software for distributed systems
Distribution of control – administration issues, detection of faults

----- slide 10 -----
1.5 Design Goals/ Goals of DS
4 goals must be met while designing a system to work in a distributed environment:

Resource sharing 
Sharing of available physical or non-physical resources as remote data, files, etc., in an efficient manner.
Cost effective implementation of the system.
Good collaboration is a must among nodes or users, along with information exchange
There might also be increased security concerns due to above action

----- slide 11 -----
1.5 Design Goals
Openness

Define syntax and semantics, services with standard rule
Services specified through an interface defined in IDL (Interface Definition Language)
IDL should give description related to function name, parameters, return values, possible exceptions and uses of service, but the interface should be neutral.
Helps to achieve interoperability ( 2 implementations working together using each other services) and  portability (application designed for one DS to be able to work properly and in a correct way in other DS with same implementations).
Adding and removing of system components without effecting the main.
The first step in openness is publishing the documentation of software components and interfaces of the components to make them available to software developers.

----- slide 12 -----
Design Goals…
Transparency
Realization of single coherent system by hiding the processes and resources.
Different form  of Transparency

Source: Tanenbaun
[in the slide picture] Access
Location
Migration
Replication
Concurrency
Failure
Description
Hide differences in data representation and how an object is
Hide where an object is located
in use
Hide that an object may be shared by several independent
users

----- slide 13 -----
1.6 Main Problems
Heterogeneity
Heterogeneous components must be able to interoperate, applicable to all Networks, Hardware Architectures, OS, Programming Languages and Written programs
The above problem is masked by the below examples, to provide better heterogeneity
Middleware
Internet Protocols
Mobile code

----- slide 14 -----
Middleware:
Applies to a software layer, provides a programming abstraction, and masks the heterogeneity of the underlying networks, hardware, operating systems and programming languages. 
CORBA (Common Object Request Broker),ODBC, JDBC, RMI are some examples.
Supplies services so that application can exchange data in standard way.
[in the slide picture] Machine A
Local OS
Machine B
Distributed applications
Machine C

----- slide 15 -----
Reliability
Availability: fraction of time the system is usable, improved by redundancy.
Need to maintain consistency and be secure 
Fault tolerance: need to mask failures, recover from errors.

Security
Must be able to fulfill three components; Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability
Mechanism to be adopted: Encryption, Authentication and Authorization
Some challenges still exist; DOS attack and Mobile code security

----- slide 16 -----
Scalability
Controlling the cost of physical resources 
Cost should linearly increase with the system size. 
Controlling the performance loss 
Preventing software resources running out 
Avoiding performance bottlenecks
Using decentralized algorithms to avoid having performance bottlenecks.
Caching and replication in Web are examples of providing scalability.

----- slide 17 -----
1.7 Models of Distributed System
Architecture Models
Client-server Model
Peer-to-Peer Model
Fundamental Models
Interaction Model
Fault/Failure Model
Security Model

----- slide 18 -----
Contd..
Architecture Models
An Architectural model of a distributed system is concerned with the placement of its parts and the relationships between them. 

Client-Server Model
The client-server model is usually based on a simple request/reply protocol, implemented with send/receive primitives or using remote procedure calls (RPC) or Remote method invocation (RMI)
The client sends a request (invocation) message to the server asking for some service; The server does the work and returns a result (e.g. the data requested) or an error code, if the work could not be performed.
[in the slide picture] process (object): (D
computer (node):

----- slide 19 -----
Peer-to-peer 
All process or objects play the same role.
Processes (objects) interact without a particular distinction between clients and servers.
The pattern of communication depends on the particular application.
A large number of data objects are shared; any individual computer holds only a small part of the application database.
Processing and communication loads for access to objects are distributed across many computers and access links.
This is the most general and flexible model.

Problems with peer-to-peer:

High complexity due to cleverly placed individual objects
Retrieving the objects
maintain a potentially large number of replicas.
[in the slide picture] Applicat •on
Shara
Peers 5 .
Applica •on

----- slide 20 -----
Fundamental Model
Fundamental Models are concerned with a more  formal description of the properties that are common in all of the architectural models.

Interaction Model
Addresses the communication issues of messages in distributed environment.
Communication occurs within processes.
The processes interact by passing messages, resulting in: Communication (information flow) and Coordination (synchronization and ordering of activities) between processes
Interaction model reflects the facts that communication takes place with delays.

----- slide 21 -----
Two variants of the interaction Model

In a distributed system it is hard to set time limits on the time taken for process execution, message delivery or clock drift.

Synchronous distributed systems

It has a strong assumption of time 
The time to execute each step of a process has known lower and upper bounds.
Each message transmitted over a channel is received within a known bounded time.
Each process has a local clock whose drift rate from real time has a known bound.

Asynchronous distributed systems

It has no assumption about time.
There is no bound on process execution speeds.
Each step may take an arbitrary long time.
There is no bound on message transmission delays.
A message may be received after an arbitrary long time.
There is no bound on clock drift rates.
The drift rate of a clock is arbitrary.

----- slide 22 -----
Contd..
Failure Model
Failure model defines and classifies the faults.
Fault models are needed in order to build systems with predictable behavior in case of faults (systems that are fault-tolerant).
such a system will function according to the predictions, only as long as the real faults behave as defined by the “fault model”.
Omission Failures
Arbitrary Failures
Timing Failures

Security Model
Security model defines and classifies the forms of attacks.
It provides a basis for analysis of threats to a system
It is used to design of systems that are able to resist threats

----- slide 23 -----
1.8 Resource Sharing and the Web Challenges
Resource Sharing
Users of a system always tends to share resources like hardware (printer), data (files) and specific functioning resources (search engines).
Service manages a collection of related resources and provides the functionality to the users. Like a file sharing is initiated by a file service providing read, write and delete operations or functions on the files.
Services can be invoked from other computers only by communication.

Web Challenges
Dangling links presence. (resource deleted, but links present to that particular resource).
Response to web users quite slow 
Lack of proper User Interface.

----- slide 24 -----
1.9 Types of Distributed System
Grid System
A type of parallel and distributed system that enables the sharing, selection, and aggregation of geographically distributed autonomous resources dynamically at runtime depending on their availability, capability, performance, cost, and users' quality-of-service requirements.
Grid systems have high degree of heterogeneity.

Architecture:
The fabric layer provides interface to local resources at a specific site which can be shared within a virtual organization. 
The connectivity layer has communication protocols to support grid transactions. It supports delegation of rights from authenticated users to programs running on behalf of those users.
The resource layer manages a single resource with the help of functions provided by connectivity layer and interfaces of fabric layer. It is responsible for access control.
The collective layer handles access to multiple resources via resource discovery, allocation and scheduling of multiple resources along with data replication.
The application layer consists of applications that uses the services provided by the grid computing system.
[in the slide picture] Connectivity layet

----- slide 25 -----
Cluster System
A type of parallel or distributed processing system, which consists of a collection of interconnected stand-alone computers cooperatively working together as a single, integrated computing resource. The computers may be standard per uniprocessor or multiprocessor. 
A cluster can be used for providing highly scalable services such as search engines provide for users all over the Internet.
Cluster system is generally used for parallel programming in which a single program is run in parallel on multiple computers within the system.
The feature of cluster computing is homogeneity. It means all the computers within the cluster system must have same operating system and must be operated within the same network.

----- slide 26 -----
Cloud System
Cloud computing system is a type of Internet-based computing that provides shared computer processing resources and data to computers and other devices on demand.
 It enables on demand access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources.
A number of different service model have been established
Software as a service (SaaS) – applications provided by cloud providers
Platform as a service (PaaS) – environment for development of web applications.
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS) – provide technical infrastructures as servers, computing and networking resources, storage facility, archiving data, etc.
