source: Lecture Notes - all Chapterwise\Chapter 6 - Virtualization and Cloud Architecture\Ch6_Virtlzn_Cloud-Ref-Arch_ResrcProvsnMgmt.pptx
method: pptx
sha256: c2756a0607c6a861a23daf69e1e7718214e9bd182e1f7d5d9ca5c8b917a771c6
pages:  47
ocr:    47 page(s)
rotation: 0
dpi:    600
----------------------------------------------------------------------
----- slide 1 -----
Chapter 6-Virtualization and Cloud Architecture

----- slide 2 -----
Definition
Virtualization is the ability to run multiple operating systems on a single physical system and share the underlying hardware resources.
It is the process by which one computer hosts the appearance of many computers.
Virtualization is used to improve IT throughput and costs by using physical resources as a pool from which virtual resources can be allocated.

----- slide 3 -----
Virtualization Architecture
A Virtual machine (VM) is an isolated runtime environment (guest OS and applications) 
Multiple virtual systems (VMs) can run on a single physical system
[in the slide picture] Ap plica ti ons Appl icati ons
ooo
Virtualization Platform (Xen, KVM, VMware...)
Physical Box

----- slide 4 -----
[in the slide picture] Application
Virtualization
Storage
Network
Server
Desktop
Data

----- slide 5 -----
[in the slide picture] Application Virtualization
from a server.
The server stores all personal information and other characteristics of the
application but can still run on a local workstation through the internet.
from a separate computer than the one on which the application is installed.
on a server and deliver the apps to an end user's computer.
For the user, the experience of the virtualized app is the same as using the installed
app on a physical machine.

----- slide 6 -----
[in the slide picture] Network Virtualization
The ability to run multiple virtual networks with each has a separate control and
data plan.
It co-exists together on top of one physical network. It can be managed by
individual parties that potentially confidential to each other.
networks—logical switches, routers, firewalls, load balancer, Virtual Private
Network (VPN), and workload security within days or even in weeks.
making them operate as single or multiple independent networks called Virtual

----- slide 7 -----
[in the slide picture] Desktop Virtualization
data centre.
It allows the user to access their desktop virtually, from any location by a different
machine.
Users who want specific operating systems other than Windows Server will need
to have a virtual desktop.
management of software installation, updates, and patches.
access a desktop from a connected device. It separates the desktop environment
and its applications from the physical client device used to access it.

----- slide 8 -----
[in the slide picture] Storage Virtualization
system.
The servers aren't aware of exactly where their data is stored, and instead function
more like worker bees in a hive. It makes managing storage from multiple sources
to be managed and utilized as a single repository.
devices into what appears to be a single storage device -
or pool of available
storage capacity -- that is managed from a central console.
The technology relies on software to identify available storage capacity from
physical devices and to then aggregate that capacity as a pool of storage that can be
used by traditional architecture servers or in a virtual environment by virtual
machines

----- slide 9 -----
[in the slide picture] Server Virtualization
unique and isolated virtual servers by means of a software application. Each virtual
server can run its own operating systems independently.
This is a kind of virtualization in which masking of server resources takes place.
Here, the central-server(physical server) is divided into multiple different virtual
servers by changing the identity number, processors. So, each system can operate
its own operating systems in isolate manner.
Where each sub-server knows the identity of the central server. It causes an
increase in the performance and reduces the operating cost by the deployment of
main server resources into a sub-server resource. It's beneficial in virtual
migration, reduce energy consumption, reduce infrastructural cost, etc

----- slide 10 -----
[in the slide picture] Data Virtualization
This is the kind of virtualization in which the data is collected from various
sources and managed that at a single place without knowing more about the
technical information like how data is collected, stored & formatted then arranged
that data logically so that its virtual view can be accessed by its interested people
and stakeholders, and users through the various cloud services remotely.
Many big giant companies are providing their services like Oracle, IBNI, Cdata,
etc.
It can be used to performing various kind of tasks such as:
Data-integration
Business-integration
Service-oriented architecture data-services
Searching organizational data

----- slide 11 -----
Hypervisor
A hypervisor, a.k.a. a virtual machine manager/monitor (VMM), or virtualization manager, is a program that allows multiple operating systems to share a single hardware host.  
Each guest operating system appears to have the host's processor, memory, and other resources all to itself. However, the hypervisor is actually controlling the host processor and resources, allocating what is needed to each operating system in turn and making sure that the guest operating systems (called virtual machines) cannot disrupt each other.

----- slide 12 -----
[in the slide picture] The hypervisor supports hardware-level virtualization on bare metal devices like
CPU, memory, disk and network interfaces.
The hypervisor software sits directly between the physical hardware and its OS.
This virtualization layer is referred to as either the VN'IN/I or the hypervisor. The
hypervisor provides hypercalls for the guest OSes and applications.
TYPE-I Hypervisor:
The hypervisor runs directly on the underlying host system. It is also known as a
"Native Hypervisor" or "Bare metal hypervisor". It does not require any base
server operating system. It has direct access to hardware resources.
'Hosted Hypervisor". Such kind of hypervisors doesn't run directly over the
underlying hardware rather they run as an application in a Host system(physical
machine)

----- slide 13 -----
Roles of the Hypervisor
Isolating/Emulating resources
CPU: Scheduling virtual machines
Memory: Managing memory
I/O: Emulating I/O devices
Networking
Managing virtual machines

----- slide 14 -----
[in the slide picture] The Xen Architecture: Xen is an open source hypervisor program developed by
Cambridge University. Xen is a micro-kernel hypervisor, which separates the
policy from the mechanism.
The Xen hypervisor implements all the mechanisms, leaving the policy to be
handled by Domain O.
Xen does not include any device drivers natively. It just provides a mechanism by
which a guest OS can have direct access to the physical devices.
As a result, the size of the Xen hypervisor is kept rather small. Xen provides a
virtual environment located between the hardware and the OS.
The core components of a Xen system are the hypervisor, kernel, and applications

----- slide 15 -----
[in the slide picture] Control, 1/0 (Domain O)
Xen Architecture
Guest domain
XEN (Hypervisor)
Hardware devices

----- slide 16 -----
[in the slide picture] The guest OS, which has control ability, is called Domain 0, and the others are
called Domain U.
Domain 0 is a privileged guest OS of Xen. It is first loaded when Xen boots
without any file system drivers being available.
Domain 0 is designed to access hardware directly and manage devices. Therefore,
one of the responsibilities of Domain 0 is to allocate and map hardware resources
for the guest domains (the Domain U domains).

----- slide 17 -----
[in the slide picture] CPU Virtualization
A V Nil is a duplicate of an existing computer system in which a majority of the
V Nl instructions are executed on the host processor in native mode.
Thus, unprivileged instructions of V IV'1s run directly on the host machine for
higher efficiency.
The critical instructions are divided into three categories: privileged instructions,
control-sensitive instructions, and behavior-sensitive instructions.
Privileged instructions execute in a privileged mode and will be trapped if
executed outside this mode.
Control-sensitive instructions attempt to change the configuration of resources
used.
Behavior-sensitive instructions have different behaviors depending on the
configuration of resources, including the load and store operations over the
virtual memory.

----- slide 18 -----
[in the slide picture] A CPU architecture is virtualizable if it supports the ability to run the V Nd's
privileged and unprivileged instructions in the CPU's user mode while the V MN'I
runs in supervisor mode.
When the privileged instructions including control- and behavior-sensitive
instructions of a V Nl are executed, they are trapped in the VNIIV'I.
In this case, the VIV'INI acts as a unified mediator for hardware access from
different VN/Is to guarantee the correctness and stability of the whole system.
However, not all CPU architectures are virtualizable. RISC CPU architectures
can be naturally virtualized because all control- and behavior-sensitive
instructions are privileged instructions.
On the contrary, x86 CPU architectures are not primarily designed to support
virtualization.

----- slide 19 -----
[in the slide picture] Mennory Virtualization
Virtual memory virtualization is similar to the virtual memory support provided
by modern operating systems.
In a traditional execution environment, the operating system maintains mappings
of virtual memory to machine memory using page tables, which is a one-stage
mapping from virtual memory to machine memory.
All modern x86 CPUs include a memory management unit (IV'INIU) and
a translation lookaside buffer (T LB) to optimize virtual memory performance.
However, in a virtual execution environment, virtual memory virtualization
involves sharing the physical system memory in RANI and dynamically allocating
it to the physical memory of the V N/ls.

----- slide 20 -----
[in the slide picture] A two-stage mapping process should be maintained by the guest OS and the
VIV/INI, respectively: virtual memory to physical memory and physical memory to
machine memory.
The guest OS continues to control the mapping of virtual addresses to the physical
memory addresses of V Nfs.
The V IV'IIV/I is responsible for mapping the guest physical memory to the actual

----- slide 21 -----
[in the slide picture] Two-level memory mapping procedure
VMI
Processl
Process2
Process 1
VM2
Virtual VA
Physical PA
Machine MA

----- slide 22 -----
[in the slide picture] 1/0 Virtualization
devices and the shared physical hardware.
virtualization, and direct 1/0.
Full device approach emulates well-known, real-world devices. All the functions of
a device or bus infrastructure, such as device enumeration, identification, interrupts,
and DNIA, are replicated in software.
This software is located in the VMN'I and acts as a virtual device.
The 1/0 access requests of the guest OS are trapped in the VIVIN'I which interacts
with the 1/0 devices.

----- slide 23 -----
[in the slide picture] Guest OS
Device driver
emulation
VO Stack
1/0 Virtualization
• Virtual device
remaps guest and real 1/0 addresses
multiplexes and drives the physical device
1/0 features. e.g., COW disks
• Real device
The full device enmulation approach

----- slide 24 -----
[in the slide picture] Direct 1/0 virtualization lets the VIVI access devices directly.
It can achieve close-to-native performance without high CPU costs. However,
current direct 1/0 virtualization implementations focus on networking for
mainframes.
There are a lot of challenges for commodity hardware devices.
For example, when a physical device is reclaimed (required by workload migration)
for later reassign-ment, it may have been set to an arbitrary state (e.g., DMA to
some arbitrary memory locations) that can function incorrectly or even crash the
whole system.
Since software-based 1/0 virtualization requires a very high overhead of device
emulation, hardware-assisted 1/0 virtualization is critical.

----- slide 25 -----
Benefits of Virtualization
Sharing of resources helps cost reduction
Isolation: Virtual machines are isolated from each other as if they are physically separated
Encapsulation: Virtual machines encapsulate a complete computing environment
Hardware Independence: Virtual machines run independently of underlying hardware
Portability: Virtual machines can be migrated between different hosts.

----- slide 26 -----
Hypervisor Vulnerabilities
Malicious software can run on the same server:
Attack hypervisor
Access/Obstruct other VMs
26
Physical Hardware
Hypervisor
OS
OS
Apps
Apps
Guest VM1
Guest VM2
servers
[in the slide picture] Guest VMI
Hypek.cusor

----- slide 27 -----
NoHype*
NoHype removes the hypervisor
There’s nothing to attack
Complete systems solution
Still retains the needs of a virtualized cloud infrastructure
27
Physical Hardware
OS
OS
Apps
Apps
Guest VM1
Guest VM2
No hypervisor
*NoHype: Virtualized Cloud Infrastructure without the Virtualization. E. Keller, J. Szefer, J. Rexford, R. Lee. ISCA 2010.
[in the slide picture] Guest VMI
Guest vrv12

----- slide 28 -----
[in the slide picture] VIRTUAL MACHINES (VMS) VS CONTAINERS

----- slide 29 -----
[in the slide picture] Architecture: Containers vs virtual machines
@ OAP
OBins/Lib O Bins/Lib
8 Guest OS
Hypervisor
Infrastructure
Container Engine
Operating System

----- slide 30 -----
[in the slide picture] What is a virtual machine?
A virtual machine (VM) is best described as a software program that emulates the functionality of a
physical hardware or computing system. It runs on top of an emulating software, called the
hypervisor, which replicates the functionality of the underlying physical hardware resources with a
software environment. These resources may be referred to as the host machine, while the VM that
runs on the hypervisor is often called a guest machine.
The virtual machine contains all necessary elements to run the apps, including:
e storage
• Memory
• Networking
• Hardware functionality available as a virtualized system
The VM may also contain the necessary system binaries and libraries to run the apps. The actual
operating system (OS), however, is managed and executed using the hypervisor.

----- slide 31 -----
[in the slide picture] Idea: Create a small layer between hardware and operating system that performs
this abstraction called the hypervisor.
Libs
Apps
Guest O/S
Virtual Machine

----- slide 32 -----
[in the slide picture] Why Virtual Machines?
Pros:
Separation of virtual machines in terms of computation, logic, and storage
Capable of running VMS with different guest OSes
Hypervisor has greater control over the amount of system resources each VM
is allocated.
Full isolation security
Cons:
1. Larger size, less portable

----- slide 33 -----
[in the slide picture] What is a container?
Containerization creates abstraction at an OS level that allows individual, modular, and distinct
functionality of the app to run independently. As a result, several isolated workloads—the
containers—can dynamically operate using the same physical resources.
A less technical definition of containers might be: a unit of software that is lightweight but still
bundles the code, its dependencies, and the configuration altogether into a single image. Containers
can run:
• On top bare metal servers
• On top hypervisors
• In cloud infrastructure
Containers share all necessary capabilities with the VM to operate as an isolated OS environment for
a modular app functionality with one key difference. Using a containerization engine, such as the
Docker Engine, containers create several isolated OS environments within the same host system
kernel, which can be shared with other containers dedicated to run different functions of the app.
Only bins, libraries, and other runtime components are developed or executed separately for each
container, which makes them more resource efficient as compared to VMs.

----- slide 34 -----
[in the slide picture] Idea: Virtualize the layers above the host O/ S.
Libraries
Apps
H a rdvva re
Exannple:
Ubuntu
Docker
Co nta in e r
Engine
CentOS
Node
Se rve r

----- slide 35 -----
Why Containers?
[in the slide picture] Pros:
1. Compartmentalization
2. Portability - size, ease of defining a container, versioning
3. Great Ecosystem
4. Uses host kernel for allocation of resources
Cons:
All containers must run atop the same kernel
Less secure due to sharing of underlying OS (e.g. Meltdown)
Less flexibility w.r.t hardware requirements

----- slide 36 -----
Cloud Reference Architecture
[in the slide picture] Cloud Provider
Consumer
Auditor
Security
Privacy
Impact Audit
Performance
Service Orchestration
Service Layer
SaaS
PaaS
IaaS
Resource Abstraction and
Control Layer
Physical Resource Layer
Hardware
Facility
Cloud Service
Management
Business
Support
Provisioning/
Configuration
Portability/
Interoperability
Broker
Intermediation
Aggregation
Arbitrage

----- slide 37 -----
[in the slide picture] Cloud
Service
Auditor
Broker
Consumer
Developer
Provider
Terminology of the Reference Architecture (NIST Refernece Model)
with the intent to express an opinion thereon.
(2) Audits are performed to verify conformance to standards through review of
objective evidence.
(1)
An entity as the principal stakeholder that maintains a business relationship
parties.

----- slide 38 -----
Resource Management and Provisioning

----- slide 39 -----
Resource Provisioning
[in the slide picture] Provisioning of Compute Resources (VMs)
Providers supply cloud services by signing SLAs with end users.
The SLAs must commit sufficient resources such as CPU, memory, and bandwidth that the user can use for a
preset period.
Underprovisioning of resources will lead to broken SLAs and penalties.
Overprovisioning of resources will lead to resource underutilization, and consequently, a decrease in revenue
for the provider.
Deploying an autonomous system to efficiently provision resources to users is a challenging problem.
The difficulty comes from the unpredictability of consumer demand, software and hardware failures,
heterogeneity of services (User may take Naas,Queue Service, SaaS) , power management (heat dissipation from server), and
conflicts in signed SLAs between consumers and service providers.

----- slide 40 -----
[in the slide picture] Efficient VM provisioning depends on the cloud architecture and management of cloud infrastructures.
In a virtualized cluster of servers, this demands efficient installation of VMs, live VM migration, and fast
recovery from failures.
To deploy VMs, users treat them as physical hosts with customized operating systems for specific applications.
For example, Amazon's EC2 (IaaS service from Amazon) uses Xen as the virtual machine monitor (VMM). The same
VMM is used in IBM's Blue Cloud.
In the EC2 platform, some predefined VM templates are also provided. Users can choose different kinds of
VMS from the templates.
IBM's Blue Cloud does not provide any VM templates. In general, any type of VM can run on top of Xen.
Microsoft also applies virtualization in its Azure cloud platform. The provider should offer resource-economic
services.

----- slide 41 -----
[in the slide picture] Resource Provisioning Methods
Demand-Driven method
Popularity-Driven method

----- slide 42 -----
[in the slide picture] Demand-Driven method
This method adds or removes computing instances based on the current utilization level of the allocated resources.
using one Xeon processor more than 60 percent of the time for an extended period.
In general, when a resource has surpassed a threshold for a certain amount of time, the scheme increases that resource
based on demand. When a resource is below a threshold for a certain amount of time, that resource could be decreased
accordingly
• (Defines a range for CPU utilization say for eg: 30% to 70%. if CPU utilization below 30% decreases the CPU capacity. If CPU utilization above 70% increases the CPU capacity)
Amazon implements such an auto-scale feature in its EC2 platform.
This method is easy to implement.
Disadvantage: The scheme does not work out right if the workload changes abruptly.

----- slide 43 -----
[in the slide picture] Event Driven method
This scheme adds or removes machine instances based on a specific time event.
The scheme works better for seasonal or predicted events such as Christmastime in the West and the Lunar
New Year in the East.
During these events, the number of users grows before the event period and then decreases during the event
This scheme anticipates peak traffic before it happens.
The method results in a minimal loss of QoS, if the event is predicted correctly. Otherwise, wasted resources
are even greater due to events that do not follow a fixed pattern.

----- slide 44 -----
[in the slide picture] Popularity-Driven method
• In this method, the Internet searches for popularity of certain applications and creates the instances by
popularity demand. (Currently popular applications* Facebook, Instagram, Twitter)
The scheme anticipates increased traffic with popularity.
Again, the scheme has a minimal loss of QoS, if the predicted popularity is correct. Resources may be wasted if
traffic does not occur as expected.

----- slide 45 -----
Inter-Cloud Resource Management
[in the slide picture] Cloud Service Tasks and Trends
The top layer in the cloud service is SaaS applications for business applications.
For example, CRM is heavily practiced in business promotion, direct sales, and marketing services.
CRM offered the first SaaS on the cloud successfully.
The approach is to widen market coverage by investigating customer behaviors and revealing opportunities by
statistical analysis.
SaaS tools also apply to distributed collaboration (Google docs), and financial and human resources management.
These cloud services have been growing rapidly in recent years.
PaaS is provided by Google, Salesforce.com, and Facebook (Facebook service), among others.
IaaS is provided by Amazon, Windows Azure, and RackRack, among others.
Collocation services require multiple cloud providers to work together to support supply chains in manufacturing.
Network cloud services provide communications such as those by AT&T, Qwest, and AboveNet.

----- slide 46 -----
[in the slide picture] 2. Software Stack for Cloud Computing
The overall software stacks are built from scratch to meet rigorous goals.
Developers have to consider how to design the system to meet critical requirements such as high throughput,
HA, and fault tolerance. (Developers need to think in designing a software that takes care of all these layers/services at different levels
and providing these services to users in such a way the meet required throughput, HA, and fault tolerance).
Even the operating system might be modified to meet the special requirement of cloud data processing. (Even os
that runs at cloud data center need to be modified that takes care of all these services NaaS, LaaS etc.)
the overall software stack structure of cloud computing software can be viewed as layers. Each layer has its
own purpose and provides the interface for the upper layers just as the traditional software stack does.
However, the lower layers are not completely transparent to the upper layers. (SaaS layer takes care of providing/sharing
softwares to customers, PaaS SaaS layer takes care of providing platform to customers, IaaS layer takes care of sharing hardwares to customers)

----- slide 47 -----
[in the slide picture] 3. Runtime Support Services
As in a cluster environment, there are also some runtime supporting services in the cloud computing
Cluster monitoring is used to collect the runtime status of the entire cluster.
The scheduler queues the tasks submitted to the whole cluster and assigns the tasks to the processing nodes
according to node availability.
The distributed scheduler for the cloud application has special characteristics that can support cloud
applications, such as scheduling the programs written in MapReduce style.
The runtime support system keeps the cloud cluster working properly with high efficiency.
